 
 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 1 of 59 
 Guidance 
 
Imbalance Pricing Guidance 
A guide to electricity imbalance pricing in Great Britain 
 
This document explains the electricity imbalance pricing (“cash out”) arrangements in the 
Balancing and Settlement Code (BSC). 
Section 1 is a summary of imbalance pricing. 
Section 2 introduces the key concepts for imbalance pricing. 
Section 3 covers the individual steps for calculating the energy imbalance 
price. 
Section 4 provides a worked example of the price calculation from start to 
finish. 
Section 5 covers the calculation of the Market Price. 
Section 6 explains when imbalance charges are billed to Parties. 
Section 7 details how imbalance pricing data is published. 
Section 8 contains a glossary of terms. 
Section 9 Appendix 1 – Reserve Scarcity Price method 
Section 10 Appendix 2 – Demand Control Actions 
Section 11 Appendix 3 – The method for calculating the BPA and SPA 
 
Where a term is first defined it appears in the document in bold font. 
Throughout the document you will find references to the relevant paragraphs of the BSC, 
should you wish to use this document to help you interpret the BSC. 
 
 
 
If you need help, or more 
information, please email: 
bscservicedesk@cgi.com  
T: 0370 010 6950 
 
Visit our website: 
www.elexon.co.uk 
Contact: Market Operations  
market.operations@elexon.co.uk 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 2 of 59 
Contents 
 
1. Summary 3 
2. Key concepts 5 
3. How does pricing work? 14 
4. Pricing calculation example 33 
5. How does the Market Price work? 43 
6. Imbalance charges 44 
7. Imbalance pricing data 45 
8. Glossary 46 
9. Appendix 1 – The Reserve Scarcity Price 52 
10. Appendix 2 – Demand Control actions 56 
11. Appendix 3 – The BPA and SPA 57 
 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 3 of 59 
1. Summary 
Imbalance pricing (also known as “cash out”) is a key part of the wholesale trading 
arrangements in Great Britain. This document explains why we have imbalance charges, 
where they fit into the rest of the trading arrangements, how they are calculated and 
when they are paid. The complete formal rules for imbalance settlement are contained in 
the Balancing and Settlement Code (BSC). 
The wholesale electricity market is set up so that organisations that require electricity for 
their customers (Suppliers) enter into contracts with organisations that produce 
electricity (Generators). Together we call these organisations BSC Parties or Parties. 
However, the contracts between Parties do not always cover the generation or demand 
requirements on the Transmission System. This is a problem, as electricity cannot be 
stored economically in large quantities, and Power Station generation must always balance 
out consumer demand plus energy lost as heat when electricity is transported 
(Transmission Losses). To balance the Transmission System, National Electricity 
Transmission System Operator (NETSO) acts as the System Operator (SO) and takes 
balancing actions. A balancing action is an instruction to a Party, in accordance with 
agreed rules, to either increase or decrease generation, or increase or decrease demand. 
Parties need to submit notifications (Physical Notifications) for each half hour trading 
period (what the BSC calls a Settlement Period) so that the SO can understand the 
overall imbalance of the Transmission System. 
Parties must also submit details of their contracts to the BSC Systems. After the end of the 
Settlement Period, the BSC Systems compare a Party’s contracted (traded) volume with its 
metered volume in order to determine its imbalance. If a Party is in imbalance of its 
contracted volume then it will be subject to imbalance charges. 
Imbalance prices 
There are two energy imbalance prices for each Settlement Period. These are: 
 System Buy Price (SBP); and  
 System Sell Price (SSP). 
However there is a single price calculation, so SBP will equal SSP in each Settlement 
Period. ELEXON apply these prices to Parties’ imbalances to determine their imbalance 
charges. A Party is out of balance when its contracted energy volume does not match its 
physical production or consumption. 
If a Party has under-generated or over-consumed compared to its contracted volume, it 
will have to buy that shortfall of energy at SBP. 
If a Party has over-generated or under-consumed compared to its contracted volume, it 
will have to sell that extra energy at SSP. 
 
For most periods the price calculation reflects the costs of balancing the Transmission 
System for that Settlement Period.   These will depend on the system’s overall imbalance. 
Where the Transmission System is long (too much electricity), the price calculation is based 
on actions taken by the System Operator to reduce generation or increase demand.  
Where the Transmission System is short (not enough electricity), the price calculation is 
based on actions taken by the System Operator to increase generation or decrease demand.  
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 4 of 59 
However, not all balancing actions are used in the same way by the BSC Systems as the 
SO does not take all balancing actions for the same reason. Some balancing actions are 
taken purely to balance the half hour energy imbalance of the Transmission System. These 
are ‘energy balancing’ actions. 
Other balancing actions are taken for non-energy, system management reasons. These 
are ‘system balancing’ actions. 
Examples of system balancing actions are: 
 Actions that are so small in volume they could be the result of rounding errors (De 
Minimis Tagging); 
 Actions which have no effect on the energy balancing of the System but lead to an 
overall financial benefit for the System Operator (Arbitrage Tagging); 
 Actions taken for locational balancing reasons (SO-Flagging); and 
 Actions taken to correct short-term increases or decreases in generation/demand 
(CADL Flagging). 
We use a number of processes to minimise the price impact of system balancing actions 
on the energy imbalance price calculation. They can be broadly grouped as: 
 Flagging – identifying balancing actions that are potentially system balancing. Once 
identified, we will use the Classification process to decide if they are system or energy 
balancing; 
 Classification – assessing the Flagged balancing actions against the Unflagged 
balancing actions to determine whether they are likely to have been energy balancing 
or system balancing. If a Flagged Action is more expensive than any Unflagged Action, 
then we consider it to be a system balancing action and remove its price from the 
calculation; and 
 Tagging – completely removing both the price and volume of balancing actions so that 
no part is used in the final calculation. 
After completing these processes, we adjust the remaining balancing actions for 
transmission losses and take a volume-weighted average to calculate the energy 
imbalance price. 
Where an imbalance price cannot be calculated following these steps, we use the Market 
Price. This price reflects the wholesale price of electricity. See section 5 for further details 
about this price.  
Imbalance charges 
ELEXON apply these imbalance prices to Parties’ imbalance volumes to determine their 
imbalance charges. Parties are first billed for imbalance charges approximately one month 
after the Settlement Day for which the charges were incurred. The BSC Systems carry out 
subsequent Reconciliation Runs over the next 13 months, which update the imbalance 
charges by replacing any estimated data with actual metered data. 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 5 of 59 
2. Key concepts 
The basic starting point 
In the wholesale electricity market in Great Britain, organisations that require electricity for 
their customers (Suppliers), enter into contracts with organisations that produce 
electricity (Generators), sometimes through intermediaries called Non Physical 
Traders. These types of organisation are called BSC Parties, or simply Parties. 
The basic trading period for electricity is half an hour. Each day is split into 48 half hour 
units (unless it is a day where the clocks change, which has either 46 or 50 half hours). 
Each of these half hour units is called a Settlement Period. Suppliers will calculate the 
estimated electricity requirements for their portfolio of customers for each Settlement 
Period. They will then enter into contracts with generators in order that their customers 
receive the correct quantity of electricity for each Settlement Period. 
The complete formal rules for imbalance settlement are contained in the Balancing and 
Settlement Code (BSC). 
 
What is the Transmission System? 
The Transmission System is the high voltage network that transports electricity 
throughout Great Britain. The Transmission System delivers electricity to the lower voltage 
Distribution Networks which in turn supply electricity to customers.  
 
 
Transmission  
System 
Distribution  
Network 
GSP Group 
Generation 
Customers 
Grid Supply Points 
Customers 
 
What is a Party? 
A BSC Party is an 
organisation that has 
signed up to the 
Balancing and 
Settlement Code. 
All licensed generators, 
Suppliers and 
Distributors are 
required to sign the 
BSC. Other companies 
may choose to do so. 
 

25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 6 of 59 
Why does the Transmission System need to be balanced? 
Electricity cannot be stored economically in large quantities. This means that generation 
must always equal demand plus energy lost as heat when electricity is transported 
(Transmission Losses). If it does not, then the frequency of the Transmission System 
moves away from the target frequency (50Hz) and the Transmission System becomes 
unstable. 
However, the contracts between Generators and Suppliers do not always completely 
balance the Transmission System. This could be because: 
 Suppliers may not always accurately predict demand; 
 Generators may not always be able to tightly control their generation (for example 
intermittent generation or plant tripping off the Transmission System); 
 Problems can arise with transmission lines; 
 The BSC does not require Parties to meet their contracts (although any Party which 
does not will be subject to imbalance charges); and 
 The market trades in half hour Settlement Periods, but the Transmission System must 
balance at every instant.  
Where the Transmission System is not balanced it is called imbalance. National Electricity 
Transmission System Operator (NETSO) ensures the Transmission System is always 
balanced. This job is known as system operation, and is managed by NETSO as the 
System Operator (SO). 
 
Physical Notifications, Contract Notifications and Gate Closure 
In order to balance the Transmission System, the SO needs to know what generators 
intend to generate, and what Suppliers intend to consume, for each Settlement Period. 
The SO needs this information before the start of the Settlement Period so that it can 
understand the Transmission System imbalance, plan how to balance it, and take 
balancing actions.  
Therefore, Generators and Suppliers submit Physical Notifications (PNs) for each 
Balancing Mechanism Unit (BMU) (see right) to the SO for each Settlement Period. 
And one hour before each Settlement Period the PNs of Parties are frozen. This is called 
Gate Closure. At this point the PNs become Final Physical Notifications (FPNs). After 
Gate Closure, Parties must try to adhere to the FPNs submitted to the SO. They should 
only deviate from their FPN at the instruction of the SO. 
Parties also submit Energy Contract Volume Notifications (ECVNs) to the BSC 
Systems for each Settlement Period. The ECVNs notify the BSC Systems of Parties’ 
contracted volumes, and can be submitted up to the start of the Settlement Period (the 
Submission Deadline). We will use these contracted volumes later on when we calculate 
Parties’ imbalances. 
 
 
What are Balancing 
Mechanism Units? 
Balancing Mechanism 
Units (BM Units or 
BMUs) represent the 
generation or 
consumption at a 
particular location. 
Each Party is assigned 
BMUs for their power 
stations or areas of 
demand. The BSC 
Systems sum up a 
Party’s BMU volumes 
and contracts when 
they carry out the 
Settlement 
calculations. 
 

25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 7 of 59 
The diagram below shows Gate Closure for Settlement Period 24. 
Gate Closure for Settlement Period 24 (SP24) 
 
 
Transmission System net imbalance 
Following Gate Closure, the SO is able to evaluate the net imbalance of the Transmission 
System. The SO does this by assessing the FPNs of the generators and Suppliers and 
comparing that assessment to its own forecasts for the Settlement Period. The 
Transmission System’s net imbalance is also called the Transmission System length. 
A 'long' Transmission System is one where there is more generation than demand. 
A 'short' Transmission System is one where there is more demand than generation. 
 
How does the System Operator balance the Transmission System? 
The SO has a number of ways of balancing the Transmission System: the Trans European 
Replacement Reserves Exchange (TERRE), the Balancing Mechanism and other balancing 
contracts. Whatever mechanism the SO uses, it is trying to balance the Transmission 
System as efficiently as possible. Ideally the SO would choose the cheapest balancing 
action, then the next cheapest, then the next cheapest, and so on. However, this is not 
always possible as the SO also considers: 
 Technical limitations of the Power Station or demand manager - is it able to increase 
or decrease generation/demand quickly enough to meet the requirement; and 
 Technical limitations of the Transmission System - can the generation/demand be 
transmitted to the part of the Transmission System where it is needed. 
The SO submits balancing actions to the BSC Systems using: 
 The Balancing Mechanism – for Bid Offer Acceptances (BOAs)and TERRE 
instructions; and 
 Balancing Services Adjustment Data (BSAD) – for balancing actions taken 
outside of the Balancing Mechanism or TERRE. 
The Balancing Mechanism operates after Gate Closure, whereas balancing actions 
submitted through BSAD can be taken at any point. TERRE actions are communicated 
through the Balancing Mechanism and relate to 15 minute delivery blocks. TERRE actions 
may be instructed to fulfil a balancing need for the GB Transmission System or the 
Transmission System of a different country that is connected to GB by an interconnector. 
 
SP20 
09.30 – 10.00 
SP21 
10.00 – 10.30 
SP22 
10.30 – 11.00 
SP23 
11.00 – 11.30 
SP24 
11.30 – 12.00 
ECVNs can be submitted up to 
the end of Settlement Period 23 
FPNs can be submitted up to the 
end of Settlement Period 21 
Gate Closure for SP24 
 Submission Deadline for SP24 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 8 of 59 
Timing of the Balancing Mechanism, TERRE and BSAD 
 
Ancillary Services and Commercial agreements 
In addition to the Balancing Mechanism, TERRE and BSAD, the SO also uses Ancillary and 
Commercial Services to balance the Transmission System. Ancillary and Commercial 
Services cover: 
 Reactive Power; 
 Frequency Response; 
 Black Start; and 
 Reserve Services. 
We do not normally consider these services when we calculate the energy imbalance 
prices as they are ‘system balancing’ services. However, the SO does send data of the 
volumes involved to the BSC Systems, so that the Parties that provide these services can 
have their imbalance volumes suitably adjusted. This is called Applicable Balancing 
Services Volume Data (ABSVD). 
 
The Balancing Mechanism 
The Balancing Mechanism operates from Gate Closure to real time and is managed by the 
SO. It works in a similar way to an auction. Parties submit notices telling the SO how much 
it would cost for them to deviate from their Final Physical Notification. These notices are 
called Bids and Offers. 
An Offer is a proposal to increase generation or reduce demand. 
A Bid is a proposal to reduce generation or increase demand. 
The SO assesses all the Bids and Offers for each Settlement Period and chooses the ones 
that, alongside the balancing actions submitted through BSAD, best satisfy the balancing 
requirements of the Transmission System. Participation in the Balancing Mechanism is 
optional, and Parties that choose to do so must submit Bids and Offers before Gate 
Closure for each Settlement Period. For each BM Unit, a Party can submit up to ten Bid-
Offer Pairs. 
 
Year ahead 
 Day ahead 
 One Hour 
 Settlement 
Period 
Balancing Mechanism 
BOAs 
Balancing Services Adjustment Data 
 BSAD 
Month ahead 
Gate 
Closure  
TERRE 
instructions
s 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 9 of 59 
Each Bid-Offer Pair includes: 
 An Offer Price - the price a Party wants to be paid per MWh for an increase in 
generation or decrease in demand; 
 A Bid Price - the price a Party wants to pay per MWh for a decrease in generation or an 
increase in demand (although it is possible to submit negatively priced Bids, i.e. a Party 
is paid to reduce generation); 
 The Settlement Period for which the Bid/Offer applies (for example, between 20:00 and 
20:30 on 24/07/2019); 
 The upper and lower power levels between which the Bid/Offer applies (for example, 
Bid-Offer +1 applies from FPN to 50MW above the FPN, Bid-Offer +2 applies from 
50MW above FPN to 100MW above FPN). 
 
Bids and Offers are submitted in pairs because this provides an undo mechanism for 
Acceptances. For an Accepted Offer, the paired Bid price is the ‘undo’ option (and for a Bid 
the associated Offer price is the ‘undo’ option). If the SO has already accepted the Offer, 
this is the price SO will be paid per MWh to undo the acceptance. There’s usually a 
difference between the two, which ensures that if a Party’s Bid or Offer is accepted and 
then undone, they will still receive a payment. Below is an example of ten Bid-Offer Pairs. 
 
Bid-Offer Pairs for a BM Unit 
 
 
Settlement Period 
150 MW 
Operating volume 
FPN 
Pair + 5:  Offer Price £100/MWh 
Bid Price £2/MWh 
Pair + 1:  Offer Price £20/MWh 
Bid Price £18/MWh 
Pair + 4:  Offer Price £50/MWh 
Bid Price £5/MWh 
Pair + 3:  Offer Price £35/MWh 
Bid Price £7/MWh 
Pair + 2:  Offer Price £25/MWh 
Bid Price £13/MWh 
175 MW 
200 MW 
225 MW 
250 MW 
275 MW 
Pair - 1:  Offer Price £25/MWh 
Bid Price £20/MWh 
Pair - 5:  Offer Price £7/MWh 
Bid Price £2/MWh 
Pair - 2:  Offer Price £20/MWh 
Bid Price £15/MWh 
Pair - 3:  Offer Price £15/MWh 
Bid Price £10/MWh 
Pair - 4:  Offer Price £10/MWh 
Bid Price £5/MWh 
25 MW 
50 MW 
75 MW 
100 MW 
125 MW 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 10 of 59 
Bid Offer Acceptances (BOAs) 
Accepted Bids and Offers are called Bid Offer Acceptances (BOAs). For each BOA, the 
SO contacts the BM Unit directly and instructs it to deviate from its FPN via a set of ‘spot 
points’. Each spot point represents the change in output away from FPN at a particular 
time. 
For example: 
 Spot point 1 = 00:00, 100MW; 
 Spot point 2 = 00:05, 195MW; 
 Spot point 3 = 00:25, 195MW; and 
 Spot point 4 = 00:30, 100MW. 
 
Graphically this looks like this: 
An Accepted Offer 
 
Trans European Replacement Reserves Exchange (TERRE) Actions 
Project TERRE created a central European platform for the trading of balancing energy 
with transmission System Operators in nine participating countries, including GB. On the 
central TERRE platform there is an hourly auction for 15 minute blocks of balancing 
energy.  
Transmission System Operators participating within TERRE will have the option to submit 
to a Central Platform what their net balancing need is for each 15 minute block. They also 
submit to the platform offers of balancing energy from individual Balancing Services 
Providers within their Transmission System.  
The central platform arranges an auction to match the offers of energy to the needs of the 
participating SO’s and calculates a TERRE Clearing Price. Each transmission SO will then 
have to instruct their Balancing Services Providers to deliver the needed energy.  
In GB the SO will use the Balancing Mechanism to communicate these instructions to 
Balancing Services Providers and to Settlement Systems. 
 
 
 
FPN 
200 MW 
100 MW 
175 MW 
Settlement Period 
FPN 
 
100 MW 
175 MW 
Settlement Period 
Pair + 1:  Offer Price £20/MWh 
Bid Price £18/MWh 
Pair + 2:  Offer Price £25/MWh 
Bid Price £13/MWh 
 
Interested in more 
information on Project 
TERRE? 
Project TERRE was 
implemented in June 
2020. The full 
modification report is 
available on the 
Modification P344 
webpage. 
There is also a TERRE 
Guidance Note providing 
guidance for BSC Parties 
who may want to 
participate in the EU 
Replacement Reserve 
Market and for those who 
don’t how they will be 
affected by these 
arrangements. 
 

25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 11 of 59 
Short Term Operating Reserve (STOR) 
In addition to balancing actions available in the balancing mechanism, the SO can enter 
into contracts with providers of balancing capacity to deliver when called upon. These 
additional sources of power are referred to as reserve. Most of the reserve that the SO 
procures is called Short Term Operating Reserve (STOR). 
The SO procures STOR ahead of using it via a competitive tender process. Under STOR 
contracts, availability payments are made to the balancing service provider in return for 
the capacity being made available to the SO during specific times (STOR Availability 
Windows). When STOR is called upon, the SO pays for it at a pre-agreed price (its 
Utilisation Price).  Some STOR is dispatched in the Balancing Mechanism (BM STOR) 
while some is dispatched separately (Non-BM STOR).  
Because the Utilisation Price has been pre-agreed (sometimes many months before it is 
actually used), and because STOR providers may also receive availability payments, 
Utilisation Prices may be noticeably different to the price the SO may have paid had it 
called upon a BM action.  Utilisation Prices may therefore not reflect the prevailing market 
prices at the time of use. To correct this, we use a pricing mechanism to determine a 
Reserve Scarcity Price (RSVP) and a process that sets the price for STOR actions to be 
equal to the greater of its Utilisation Price and the RSVP.  
Demand Control 
The SO can use Demand Control actions as a last resort to balance the system, in the 
rare event that there is insufficient capacity in the market to meet demand. If they are 
used they will be included in the imbalance price calculation at a price of Value of Lost 
Load (VoLL). 
If the SO is unable to call on Bids and Offers in the BM or other Balancing Services to meet 
the current demand, then it can instruct Demand Control as a last resort emergency action 
to manage the situation. When it issues a Demand Control Instruction, it will instruct 
the Distribution Network Operators to reduce demand on their Distribution Systems, either 
through reducing voltage across the network and/or disconnecting consumers. 
Balancing Services Adjustment Data (BSAD) 
Balancing actions taken outside of the Balancing Mechanism are submitted to the BSC 
Systems as Balancing Services Adjustment Data (BSAD). The SO specifies what 
balancing actions are included in BSAD in the BSAD Methodology Statement. 
BSAD is split into two components: 
 Balancing Services Adjustment Actions (BSAA); and 
 Buy Price Price Adjustment (BPA)/Sell Price Price Adjustment (SPA). 
Balancing Services Adjustment Actions 
The SO submits an individual Balancing Services Adjustment Action for each of the 
following Balancing Services: 
 Forward Contracts; 
 Energy Related Products; 
 Pre-Gate Closure Balancing Transactions (PGBTs); and 
 System-to-System services, 
 
What is Value of Lost 
Load? 
Value of Lost Load (VoLL) 
is a defined parameter in 
the BSC and is based on 
an assessment of the 
average value that 
electricity consumers 
attribute to the security 
of supply. It is currently 
set at£6,000/MWh. 
VoLL and the process for 
reviewing it are set out in 
BSC Section T.1.12. 
 
 
  
Where in the BSC? 
The processes relating to 
Demand Control 
Instructions are set out in 
Section Q.6.9. 
 

25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 12 of 59 
 Maximum Generation; 
 System to Generator Operational Intertripping; 
 Emergency de-energisation instructions;  
 Demand Side Balancing Reserve; and 
 Non-BM STOR. 
 
Buy Price Price Adjustment (BPA)/Sell Price Price Adjustment (SPA) 
The other part of BSAD is the Buy Price Price Adjustment (BPA) or the Sell Price Price 
Adjustment (SPA). The BPA is added when the net imbalance of the Transmission System 
is short. The SPA is added when the net imbalance of the Transmission System is long. 
The BPA/SPA is a reflection of the costs to the SO of regulating reserve and BM start-up. It 
does not have a volume. It simply adjusts the volume-weighted average price. 
 
 
 
Party imbalances 
A Party is in imbalance where its Contracted Volumes do not match its Metered Volumes 
(once the BSC Systems have accounted for any BOAs on the Party’s BM Units – having a 
Bid or Offer accepted will not put the Party into imbalance). 
Imbalance prices 
There are two energy imbalance prices for each Settlement Period. These are: 
 System Buy Price (SBP); and  
 System Sell Price (SSP). 
However there is a single price calculation – so SBP will equal SSP in each settlement 
period.  
ELEXON apply these prices to Parties’ imbalances to determine their imbalance charges. A 
Party is out of balance when its contracted energy volume does not match its physical 
production or consumption. 
If a Party has under-generated or over-consumed compared to its contracted volume, it 
will have to buy that shortfall of energy at SBP. 
If a Party has over-generated or under-consumed compared to its contracted volume, it 
will have to sell that extra energy at SSP 
 
For most periods the price calculation reflects the costs of balancing the Transmission 
System for that Settlement Period. These will depend on the system’s overall imbalance. 
Where the Transmission System is long (too much electricity), the price calculation is 
based on actions taken by the System Operator to reduce generation or increase 
demand.  
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 13 of 59 
Where the Transmission System is short (not enough electricity), the price calculation is 
based on actions taken by the System Operator to increase generation or decrease 
demand.  
Section 3 explains how we calculate the energy imbalance price. Section 4 provides an 
example of the energy imbalance price calculation based on a theoretical set of balancing 
actions. 
There is a different calculation for prices in the event that there are no actions left 
following these steps. This is called the Market Price and reflects the wholesale price for 
electricity. See section 5 for further details of this. 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 14 of 59 
3. How does pricing work? 
What do we use to calculate the energy imbalance price? 
The BSC Systems calculate the energy imbalance price using balancing actions accepted 
by the SO for that Settlement Period. 
There are five types of balancing action: 
 Bid Offer Acceptances (BOAs);Volume of GB need met (VGB); 
 Replacement Reserve Aggregated Unpriced System Buy and Sell 
Actions (RRAUSB and RRAUSS); 
 Balancing Services Adjustment Actions (BSAAs); and 
 Demand Control Actions. 
 
Balancing actions either increase the energy or decrease the demand for energy on the 
Transmission System; or decrease the energy on the Transmission System. 
 
Which balancing actions to use? 
We do not use all balancing actions in the same way, as the SO does not take all balancing 
actions for the same reason. Some balancing actions are taken purely to balance the half 
hourly energy imbalance of the Transmission System. These are ‘energy’ balancing 
actions. 
However, some balancing actions are taken for non-energy, system-management reasons. 
These are ‘system’ balancing actions. 
Examples of system balancing actions are: 
 Actions that are so small in volume they could be the result of rounding errors (De 
Minimis tagging); 
 Actions which have no effect on the energy balancing of the System but lead to an 
overall financial benefit for the SO (Arbitrage tagging); 
 Actions taken for locational balancing reasons (SO-Flagging); and 
 Actions taken to correct short-term increases or decreases in generation/demand 
(CADL Flagging). 
There are a number of actions which may be re-priced for the purposes of calculating the 
imbalance price. These are:  
 BOAs or BSAAs from STOR plant taken during STOR availability windows, in the 
event that their Utilisation Payment is less than the Reserve Scarcity Price; and  
 Demand Control in the event that the SO has to use this to balance the system.  
We use a number of processes to minimise the price impact of system balancing actions 
on the energy imbalance price calculation. They can be broadly grouped as: 
 
Balancing actions or 
System Actions? 
In the BSC balancing 
actions are called 
‘System Actions’. This 
is because they are 
actions which balance 
the Transmission 
System. 
 

25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 15 of 59 
 Flagging – identifying balancing actions that are potentially system balancing. Once 
identified, we will use the Classification process to decide if they are system or energy 
balancing; 
 Classification – assessing the Flagged balancing Actions against the Unflagged 
Actions to determine whether they are energy balancing or system balancing. If 
Flagged Actions are more expensive than any Unflagged Action then we remove its 
price; and 
 Tagging – completely removing both the price and volume of balancing actions so that 
no part is used in the final calculation. 
 
This section describes the processes that remove the price impact of system balancing 
actions, along with other processes that we use when calculating the energy imbalance 
price. These are: 
1. Submitting balancing actions 
2. Determining the STOR action price  
3. System Operator Flagging (SO-Flagging) 
4. Emergency Instruction Flagging 
5. Continuous Acceptance Duration Limit (CADL) Flagging 
6. Ranked Sets 
7. De Minimis Tagging 
8. Arbitrage Tagging 
9. Classification 
10. NIV Tagging 
11. Replacement Price 
12. PAR Tagging 
13. BPA/SPA 
14. Transmission Loss Multiplier 
15. Final energy imbalance price calculation 
16. Default rules 
17. Actions not included in the calculation of the energy imbalance price 
 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 16 of 59 
How are balancing actions submitted to the BSC Systems? 
Each Settlement Period, the SO sends the following balancing data to the BSC Systems:  
 The Final Physical Notifications (FPN) submitted by Parties for their BM Units; 
 The Bid–Offer Data submitted by Parties for their BM Units; 
 Bid–Offer Acceptance data; 
 Quarter Hour Volume of GB Need met; 
 Quarter Hour Interconnector Schedule; 
 Balancing Services Adjustment Data (BSAD); and  
 Demand Control Instructions.  
 
Balancing Services Adjustment Actions 
Balancing actions taken outside of the Balancing Mechanism are submitted to the BSC 
Systems using Balancing Services Adjustment Data (BSAD). The SO calculates BSAD in 
accordance with the BSAD Methodology Statement which is required under its 
Transmission Licence. 
BSAD is made up of two parts: 
 Balancing Services Adjustment Actions (disaggregated BSAD); and 
 Buy Price Price Adjustment (BPA) / Sell Price Price Adjustment (SPA). 
The BPA/SPA is used at the end of the process. 
Explanation 
Where the SO takes a balancing action outside the Balancing Mechanism, it submits it to 
the BSC Systems as a Balancing Services Adjustment Action. 
Each Balancing Services Adjustment Action has a: 
 Balancing Services Adjustment Cost – value in £ (can be a NULL cost); 
 Balancing Services Adjustment Volume – value in MWh; 
 SO-Flag - either set to True/False; and 
 STOR Provider Flag – either set to True/False. 
 
Once the BSC Systems receive the Balancing Services Adjustment Action, they convert the 
Balancing Services Adjustment Cost to a Balancing Services Adjustment Price by dividing 
the Balancing Services Adjustment Cost by the Balancing Services Adjustment Volume: 
 
)Volume(MWh
Cost(£)h)Price(£/MW 
 
  
 
Where in the BSC? 
The structure of 
Balancing Services 
Adjustment Actions is 
described in Section 
Q6.3.2. 
The BSC Systems 
calculation for 
converting the 
Balancing Services 
Adjustment Cost to the 
Balancing Services 
Adjustment Price is in 
Section Q6.3.2A. 
Balancing Services 
Adjustment Actions are 
referred to throughout 
Section T Annex T-1, 
as they undergo all but 
one of the calculation 
processes. 
 

25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 17 of 59 
Trans European Replacement Reserves Exchange (TERRE) Actions 
Energy Balancing Volumes relating to TERRE instructions are aggregated into three types 
of actions:  
 Volume of GB need met (VGB) – priced at the TERRE Clearing Price; 
 Replacement Reserve Aggregated Unpriced System Buy Actions (RRAUSB) – 
priced at £0/MWh; and  
 Replacement Reserve Aggregated Unpriced System Sell Actions (RRAUSS) 
– priced at £0/MWh. 
When the SO gives TERRE instructions to a Balancing Services Provider the resulting 
energy balancing volumes could be to: 
 Fulfil a need for balancing energy for GB; 
 Fulfil a need for balancing energy for a different Transmission System; or 
 To help a unit ramp up or down to deliver the required balancing energy need. 
We only want the price energy that helped to meet GB need to be reflected in the 
Imbalance Price Calculation, this is the Volume of GB need met (VGB). Balancing 
energy resulting from TERRE instructions that did not meet the GB need are aggregated 
into Replacement Reserve Aggregated Unpriced System Buy and Sell Actions 
(RRAUSB and RRAUSS).  
All TERRE action types will be included in the calculation of the Imbalance Price and 
subject to the Flagging and Tagging processes (Section 3). 
 
Where in the BSC? 
The calculations for 
deriving VGB, RRAUSB 
and RRAUSS actions is 
set out in Annex T-1. 
 

25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 18 of 59 
Determining STOR Action Prices 
Explanation  
There are times when the use of STOR plant to balance the system can have a dampening 
effect on imbalance prices. This is because of how it is procured and paid for. See 
Appendix 1 for further detail.  
To correct this, we use a pricing mechanism to calculate the Reserve Scarcity Price 
(RSVP). The RSVP is designed to respond to capacity margins so that it rises as the 
system gets tighter (the gap between available and required generation narrows). It is 
calculated using a measure of system reliability called Loss of Load Probability (LoLP). 
LoLP is a value between 0 and 1, and represents a measure of scarcity in available 
generation capacity, as calculated by the System Operator at Gate Closure. The RSVP is 
determined by multiplying the LoLP by the price of disconnections, Value of Lost Load 
(VoLL). 
All actions from STOR providers are included in the calculation of Imbalance Prices but 
whether a STOR action is re-priced depends firstly on whether the STOR action was taken 
during a STOR Availability Window.  A STOR Availability Window is the window of time 
when STOR plant are required to make their capacity available to the SO. Whether an 
action is re-priced will also depend on the level of its Utilisation Payment compared to the 
RSVP for that half-hour. STOR actions taken during STOR Availability windows are included 
in the calculation of imbalance prices as individual actions, with a price which is the 
greater of: 
 The Utilisation Price for the action – i.e. the price that STOR capacity is paid when it 
is called upon; and  
 The Reserve Scarcity Price (RSVP). 
Re-priced STOR actions are then treated like other BOAs for the next steps of price 
calculation (ranking, tagging, etc). Actions from STOR plant outside the STOR Availability 
Windows are not re-priced. 
Example 
In the following example, the De-Rated Margin at Gate Closure is 1,238MW. This 
corresponded to a LOLP of 0.0334, as determined by the Loss of Load Probability 
Calculation Statement. This produces an RSP of £200.40/MWh (0.0334 * £6,000). As these 
actions took place during a STOR Availability Window, they are re-priced where the RSP is 
greater than their Utilisation Prices.  
 
 
 
Offer 
30MWh at £220/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
15MWh at £50/MWh 
Offer 
30MWh at £220/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
15MWh at £200.40/MWh 
Key 
STOR provider flagged 
First Stage Unflagged 
Re-priced 
Not re-priced 
 
What is LOLP? 
Loss of Load Probability 
(LOLP) is a measure of 
system reliability, 
calculated by The System 
Operator for each 
Settlement Period. 
 
The System Operator’s 
methodology is set out in 
the Loss of Load 
Probability Calculation 
Statement 
 
 
Where in the BSC? 
The process for re-pricing 
STOR actions is set out in 
Section T.3.14, and the 
process for determining 
the RSP is set out in 
section T.3.13. 
 

25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 19 of 59 
NULL priced Balancing Services Adjustment Actions 
Balancing Services Adjustment Actions that result from intertrips are submitted with a 
NULL cost (and therefore a NULL Price). This is because intertrip-related Balancing 
Services Adjustment Actions do not have a cost/price available in the required timescales. 
NULL priced Balancing Services Adjustment Actions are always classified as Second 
Stage Flagged balancing actions and are unpriced. However, if NULL priced Balancing 
Services Adjustment Actions enter the Net Imbalance Volume they will be subject to a 
Replacement Price. 
 
System Operator Flagging 
Explanation 
System Operator Flagging (SO-Flagging) is the process that identifies BOAs and 
Balancing Services Adjustment Actions that are potentially taken for system balancing 
reasons. The SO-Flagging process is documented in the System Management Action 
Flagging Methodology Statement which is required under National Grid Electricity 
System Operator (NETSO)’s Transmission Licence. 
For BOAs, the SO flags when it believes the BOA may be impacted by a transmission 
constraint. 
For Balancing Services Adjustment Actions, the SO also flags when it believes the 
balancing action was impacted by a transmission constraint. It also has two additional 
reasons for flagging a Balancing Services Adjustment Action: 
 Any system-to-system balancing service over an Interconnector which is used to avoid 
adverse effects arising on the GB Transmission System from significant load profile 
changes; and 
 Any system-to-system balancing service over an Interconnector which is used by 
another country’s Transmission System Operator (TSO) for the purposes of resolving a 
system operation issue. 
 
For the purposes of the Classification process, an SO-Flagged balancing action is a First 
Stage Flagged balancing action. 
What is a transmission constraint? 
A transmission constraint is any limit on the ability of the Transmission System, or any 
part of it, to transmit power to a location which demands it.  
Transmission constraints arise from: 
 The need not to exceed the thermal rating of any asset forming part of the 
Transmission System (preventing the lines getting too hot); 
 The need to maintain voltages on the Transmission System; and/or 
 The need to maintain the transient and dynamic stability of electricity plant, equipment 
and systems directly or indirectly connected to the Transmission System. 
 
 
Where in the BSC? 
The SO-Flagging process 
is described in Section T 
Annex T-1 paragraph 3. 
 
 
What is an 
intertrip? 
An intertrip is a circuit-
breaker that, when 
activated, disconnects a 
generator or demand 
from the Transmission 
System. This might be to 
relieve localised network 
overloads, maintain 
system stability, manage 
system voltages and/or 
ensure quick restoration 
of the Transmission 
System. 
 

25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 20 of 59 
Emergency Flagging 
Explanation 
The SO issues Emergency Instructions to Power Stations (and potentially customers) in 
circumstances when there is a specific requirement to isolate a Generating Unit, Power 
Station or customer demand from the Transmission System. For example, an emergency 
could occur if there was a fire or breakdown of a piece of Transmission System equipment, 
or if there were a major incident that affected part of the Transmission System. 
Emergency Instructions are inserted into the energy imbalance price calculation as BOAs. 
The SO is able to flag or not flag Emergency Instructions, depending on whether they 
were issued for system balancing reasons. 
A flagged Emergency Instruction is called ‘Emergency Flagged’. Emergency Flagged 
actions are treated in an identical way to SO-Flagged BOAs and are First Stage Flagged 
balancing actions. 
An unflagged Emergency instruction is called an ‘Emergency Acceptance’. Emergency 
Acceptances are treated in an identical way to unflagged BOAs and are First Stage 
Unflagged balancing actions. 
 
Continuous Acceptance Duration Limit (CADL) Flagging 
Explanation 
The SO may need to accept short-duration actions to cater for a sudden increase/decrease 
in generation or demand. We consider these actions to be potentially system balancing. 
This is because they are taken in order to balance the Transmission System in real time 
and may not be required to balance the energy on the Transmission System over the half 
hour Settlement Period. 
In order to distinguish between such short-duration actions we apply a rule called the 
Continuous Acceptance Duration Limit (CADL). It is a time limit for BOAs. If a BOA is 
part of a series of acceptances on the same BM Unit which is less than the CADL it will be 
flagged. A CADL Flagged BOA is a First Stage Flagged action. 
The CADL parameter may be altered by the BSC Panel (with Ofgem’s approval) from time 
to time after consultation with the SO and Parties. CADL is currently equal to 10 minutes, 
as on 1 April 2019 it reduced from 15 minutes.  
Below is an example of CADL Flagging with two BOAs for different BM Units, one less than 
CADL and one more than CADL. The Boa which is less than the CADL becomes Flagged. 
CADL Flagging example  
 
£40/MWh 
100MWh 
£60/MWh 
50MWh 
CADL 
 30 mins 
£40/MWh 
100MWh 
£60/MWh 
50MWh 
CADL 
 30 mins 
First Stage Flagged 
First Stage Unflagged 
Key 
Before CADL flagging 
 After CADL flagging 
 
Where in the BSC? 
The Continuous 
Acceptance Duration 
Limit is defined in Section 
T paragraph 1.9. 
The CADL Flagging 
process is described in 
Section T Annex T-1 
paragraphs 3 and 12. 
 
 
Where in the BSC? 
Emergency Instructions 
are defined in Section 
Q5.1.3(b), Q5.3.1(d) and 
Q5.3.1(e). 
The use of Emergency 
Flagged actions and 
Emergency Acceptances 
in the energy imbalance 
price calculation is 
described in Section T 
Annex T-1 paragraph 5. 
 

25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 21 of 59 
Ranked Sets 
Once the BSC Systems have received all the balancing actions, they are ranked in price 
order in two separate Ranked Sets: 
 The Sell Ranked Set includes all the sell balancing actions which reduce 
generation on the Transmission System or increase demand; and 
 The Buy Ranked Set includes all the buy balancing actions which increase 
generation on the Transmission System or reduce demand. 
 
When ranking in price order, we always consider how expensive a balancing action is to 
the Transmission System. The cheapest balancing action is ranked first and the most 
expensive balancing action is ranked last. 
For a buy balancing action, the higher the price the more expensive the action. So a 
£10/MWh buy balancing action will be ranked before a £20/MWh buy balancing action. 
For a sell balancing action, the lower the price the more expensive the action. This is 
because the price is what a Party will pay per MWh to reduce their generation or increase 
demand. So a £20/MWh sell balancing action will be ranked before a £10/MWh sell 
balancing action. 
Below is an example of actions being separated out into the Buy Ranked Set and the Sell 
Ranked Set. 
Unranked balancing actions 
 
 
The above diagram is unranked. The next diagram shows how balancing actions have 
been ranked into a Buy Ranked Set and a Sell Ranked Set. We show the ranking orders in 
opposite directions. 
First Stage Flagged 
First Stage Unflagged 
Bid 
50MWh at £27/MWh 
Bid 
75MWh at £25/MWh 
Bid 
40MWh at £23/MWh 
Bid 
30MWh at £35/MWh 
BSAA - Sell 
50MWh at £24/MWh 
Offer 
30MWh at £60/MWh 
Offer 
70MWh at £50/MWh 
Offer 
120MWh at £40/MWh 
Offer 
25MWh at £120/MWh 
Offer 
30MWh at £30/MWh 
Offer 
0.5MWh at £70/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
55MWh at £170/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
35MWh at £70/MWh 
Offer 
60MWh at £320/MWh 
Offer 
50MWh at £140/MWh 
Offers 
 Bids 
Key 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 22 of 59 
Ranked balancing actions 
 
 
Bid 
50MWh at £27/MWh 
Bid 
75MWh at £25/MWh 
Bid 
30MWh at £35/MWh 
BSAA - Sell 
50MWh at £24/MWh 
Offer 
30MWh at £60/MWh 
Offer 
70MWh at £50/MWh 
Offer 
120MWh at £40/MWh 
Offer 
25MWh at £120/MWh 
Offer 
30MWh at £30/MWh 
Offer 
0.5MWh at £70/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
55MWh at £170/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
35MWh at £70/MWh 
Offer 
60MWh at £320/MWh 
Offer 
50MWh at £140/MWh 
Buy Ranked Set 
Sell Ranked Set 
First Stage  
Flagged 
First Stage 
Unflagged 
Key 
Ranking 
order 
Ranking 
order 
Bid 
40MWh at £23/MWh 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 23 of 59 
De Minimis Tagging 
Explanation 
De Minimis Tagging removes all balancing actions (BOAs and Balancing Services 
Adjustment Actions) with a volume less than the De Minimis Acceptance Threshold 
(DMAT). The Panel can alter the DMAT (with Ofgem’s approval) following consultation 
with the SO and Parties. The DMAT reduced from 1MWh to 0.1MWh on 1 April 2019. 
De Minimis Tagging removes potentially ‘false’ actions created due to the finite accuracy of 
the systems used to calculate Bid and Offer Volumes. All balancing actions less than DMAT 
are completely removed from the calculation of the energy imbalance price, i.e. both the 
price and volume of a De Minimis tagged BOA are excluded. 
Example of a De Minimis Tagged Offer  
Ranked Set before   Ranked Set after 
 
 
 
In this example the 0.01MWh at £60/MWh Offer is removed by De Minimis Tagging. 
 
Offer 
70MWh at £50/MWh 
Offer 
120MWh at £40/MWh 
Offer 
30MWh at £30/MWh 
Offer 
70MWh at £70/MWh 
Offer 
0.01MWh at £60/MWh 
Offer 
70MWh at £50/MWh 
Offer 
120MWh at £40/MWh 
Offer 
30MWh at £30/MWh 
Offer 
70MWh at £70/MWh 
Offer 
0.01MWh at £60/MWh 
 
Where in the BSC? 
BSC Section T1.8 defines 
the DMAT and the Panel 
revision process. 
The De Minimis tagging 
process is described in 
Annex T-1 paragraph 6. 
 

25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 24 of 59 
Arbitrage Tagging 
Explanation 
Arbitrage occurs when the price of a buy balancing action (an accepted Offer or a buy 
Balancing Services Adjustment Action) is either the same or lower than the price of a sell 
balancing action (an accepted Bid or a sell Balancing Services Adjustment Action). It is 
considered arbitrage because the SO can ‘purchase’ the buy balancing action in the same 
instant as it ‘sells’ the sell balancing action, and makes an immediate profit for no net 
change of energy on the Transmission System. 
In cases of arbitrage, equivalent volumes of sell balancing actions and buy balancing 
actions are excluded from the energy imbalance price calculation.   
An example of a Bid and an Offer which would be subject to arbitrage is shown below: 
 
Example of BOAs which would be Arbitrage Tagged 
 
Here a generator is willing to increase generation by 30MWh for just £10/MWh, whilst 
there is another generator who is willing to pay £15/MWh to decrease generation by 
30MWh. It is considered that, in an efficient market, these two generators would have 
traded with each other. Therefore the equal volumes (30MWh) are removed from the Buy 
and Sell Ranked Sets.  
 
Offer 
30MWh at £10/MWh 
Bid 
30MWh at £15/MWh 
 
Where in the BSC? 
The Arbitrage Tagging 
process is described in 
Annex T-1 paragraphs 7 
and 13. 
 

25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 25 of 59 
Classification 
Explanation 
Classification determines which First Stage Flagged balancing actions become Second 
Stage Flagged, or Second Stage Unflagged. This is the main way that the BSC Systems 
decide if the price of a flagged action is representative of market conditions or not. Second 
stage flagged actions have prices which may distort the imbalance price market signal if 
not replaced by the Replacement Price.  
Classification occurs independently for the Buy Ranked Set and the Sell Ranked Set. Before 
Classification, a balancing action will be either a: 
 First Stage Unflagged balancing action – an energy balancing action; or 
 First Stage Flagged balancing action – a potentially system balancing action (SO-
Flagged, Emergency Flagged or CADL Flagged). 
During Classification, each First Stage Flagged balancing action is compared to the most 
expensive First Stage Unflagged balancing action in the respective Ranked Set (Buy or 
Sell). 
If a First Stage Flagged balancing action has a more expensive price than the most 
expensive First Stage Unflagged balancing action it is considered a system balancing 
action and so becomes Second Stage Flagged. 
If a First Stage Flagged balancing action has a less expensive price than the most 
expensive First Stage Unflagged balancing action it is considered an energy balancing 
action and stays Second Stage Unflagged. 
 
The example on the next page shows Classification at work. 
 
Where in the BSC? 
Section T Annex T-1 
paragraph 8 describes 
the Classification process. 
 

25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 26 of 59 
In the example below, the 10MWh buy balancing action becomes Second Stage Unflagged 
as it is less expensive than the most expensive First Stage Unflagged balancing action (the 
£120/MWh Volume of GB need met (VGB)). All other First Stage Flagged balancing actions 
become Second Stage Flagged actions as they are more expensive than the most 
expensive Unflagged balancing action. 
Following the Classification process, a balancing action will either be a: 
 Second Stage Unflagged balancing action – A balancing action which keeps its 
original price; or 
 Second Stage Flagged balancing action – A balancing action which will be repriced 
by the Replacement Price. 
 
Other Classification rules  
 Upon Classification, any First Stage Unflagged balancing actions are automatically 
classified as Second Stage Unflagged balancing actions. 
 If there are no First Stage Unflagged balancing actions in a Ranked Set, all balancing 
actions are classified as Second Stage Flagged balancing actions. 
 A NULL-priced Balancing Services Adjustment Action is always classified as a Second 
Stage Flagged balancing action. 
 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 27 of 59 
NIV Tagging 
Explanation 
Net Imbalance Volume (NIV) Tagging occurs following Classification and works by 
netting off the Buy and Sell Ranked Sets. The most expensive balancing actions are netted 
off first and are referred to as NIV Tagged. The NIV Tagging will leave either a net volume 
of Buy balancing actions, or Sell balancing actions. This is the NIV for a Settlement Period. 
Example of NIV Tagging 
 
In the example the Sell Ranked Set is NIV Tagged along with the Second Stage Flagged 
35MWh Balancing Services Adjustment Action (BSAA) and 10MWh of the Second Stage 
Flagged 30MWh Offer.  
 
When the Transmission System is short, and the SO balances the system by accepting 
a greater volume of buy balancing actions than sell balancing actions, the NIV will be 
positive. 
When the Transmission System is long, and the SO balances the system by accepting a 
greater volume of sell balancing actions than buy balancing actions, the NIV will be 
negative. 
 
Offer 
200MWh at £40/MWh 
Offer 
5MWh at £100/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
35MWh at £300/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
15MWh at £50/MWh 
Offer 
30MWh at £200/MWh 
Buy Ranked Set pre-NIV tagging 
Sell Ranked Set pre-NIV tagging 
NIV 
Offer 
200MWh at £40/MWh 
Offer 
5MWh at £100/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
15MWh at £50/MWh 
Offer 
20MWh at £200/MWh 
Bid 
15MWh at £7/MWh 
Bid 
12MWh at £1/MWh 
BSAA - Sell 
18MWh at £4/MWh 
Second Stage 
Flagged 
Second Stage 
Unflagged 
Key 
 
Where in the BSC? 
NIV Tagging is described 
in Section T Annex T-1 
paragraph 9 and 14. 
 

25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 28 of 59 
Replacement Price 
Explanation 
Where Second Stage Flagged volume exists in the NIV it must be assigned a Replacement 
Price. The Replacement Price is calculated from a volume-weighted average of the most 
expensively priced 1MWh of unflagged (and therefore priced) actions. This 
parameter is the Replacement Price Average Reference Volume (RPAR). 
An example of the Replacement Price process is shown below. In the example, the Second 
Stage Flagged 20MWh Offer requires a Replacement Price. To calculate the Replacement 
Price we use the most expensive 1MWh of priced balancing actions. In the example below 
the Replacement Price is £120/MWh (the price of the most expensive priced 1MWh) and 
this is applied to the Second Stage Flagged volume. 
Example of a Replacement Price situation 
 
 
Once the Replacement Price has been assigned, the NIV stack may have to be re-ranked 
to keep the actions in the price order. 
 
Re-priced 
Key 
Second Stage Flagged 
Second Stage Unflagged 
Offer 
30MWh at £120/MWh 
Offer 
5MWh at £100/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
20MWh at £200 
BSAA - Buy 
15MWh at £100/MWh 
Offer 
30MWh at £120/MWh 
Offer 
5MWh at £100/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
20MWh at £120/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
15MWh at £100/MWh 
 
Where in the BSC? 
RPAR is defined in 
Section T1.11. 
The Replacement Price 
Process is described in 
Section T Annex T-1 
paragraphs 10 and 15. 
 

25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 29 of 59 
PAR Tagging 
Explanation 
The last tagging process is Price Average Reference (PAR) Tagging. The energy imbalance 
price is calculated based on the volume-weighted average of a defined volume of the most 
expensive actions remaining. This defined volume is the Price Average Reference 
Volume (PAR) and is 1 MWh. PAR Tagging is applied such that: 
 Where the System is short, the imbalance price is calculated as a volume-weighted 
average of not more than 1 MWh of the most expensive actions in the NIV (i.e. up to 1 
MWh of highest priced buy balancing actions); and 
 Where the System is long, the imbalance price is calculated as a volume-weighted 
average of not more than 1 MWh of the most expensive actions in the NIV (i.e. up to 1 
MWh of lowest priced sell balancing actions). 
The purpose of the PAR Tagging mechanism is to more closely align the energy imbalance 
price with the price of the marginal energy balancing action (i.e. the most expensive action 
taken by the SO to balance total energy supply and demand). 
Example of PAR Tagging 
 
 
 
NIV 
Offer 
150MWh at £35/MWh 
VGB 
60MWh at £115/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
300MWh at £56/MWh 
Second Stage 
Unflagged 
Key 
Offer 
50MWh at £153/MWh 
PAR Volume 
Offer 
1MWh at £153/MWh 
 
Where in the BSC? 
PAR is defined in Section 
T1.10. 
The PAR process is 
described in Section T 
Annex T-1 paragraphs 11 
and 16. 
 

25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 30 of 59 
Buy Price Price Adjustment (BPA)/Sell Price Price Adjustment 
(SPA) 
Explanation 
The other part of BSAD used for the energy imbalance price calculation is the BPA/SPA. 
Only one is used for each Settlement Period. The BPA is used when the Transmission 
System is short (and the NIV is positive), and the SPA is used when the Transmission 
System is long (and the NIV is negative).  
The BPA is a reflection of the costs to the SO of regulating reserve and BM start-up. The 
SPA is made up of option fees for negative reserve and forward contracts. For further 
details of the BPA/SPA, see Appendix 3 or the BSAD Methodology Statement. 
 
For example: 
Volume-weighted average for a short Settlement Period X on an example day = 
£30/MWh 
Buy Price Adjustment for Settlement Period X on example day = £6.50/MWh 
System Buy Price = 30 + 6.50 = £36.50/MWh 
 
 
Where in the BSC? 
The requirement for the 
Transmission Company to 
send BPA/SPA in BSAD is 
in Section Q6.3.2. 
The BPA/SPA is then 
used in the final 
calculation in Section 
T4.4.2(a) and T4.4.3(a). 
 

25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 31 of 59 
Transmission Loss Multipliers (TLMs) 
Once PAR Tagging has been completed, the balancing actions still remaining will be used  
in the final calculation. At this stage they need to be adjusted for transmission losses. 
What are transmission losses? 
When electricity is transmitted over the Transmission System some energy is ‘lost’ (e.g. as 
heat). The energy lost from the Transmission System is commonly referred to as 
‘transmission losses’. 
The total losses are the total energy lost from the Transmission System at any given time, 
which equates to the difference between total metered generation and total metered 
consumption. 
How are transmission losses allocated? 
Transmission Losses are allocated by scaling up or down the Metered Volume of each non 
interconnector BM Unit. We do this via Transmission Loss Multipliers (TLMs). 
For each Settlement Period there are two TLMs calculated for each Zone, a Delivering 
TLM and an Offtaking TLM. The Delivering TLM applies to all non interconnector BM Units 
that are part of a Delivering Trading Unit (net exporter) in a specific Zone. This scales 
down the Metered Volumes. The Offtaking TLM applies to all non interconnector BM 
Units that are part of an Offtaking Trading Unit (net importer) in a specific Zone. This 
scales up the consumption of these units. 
There are 14 Zones in total. The Zones are a geographic area in which the following lie: 
 a GSP Group (there being no more than one GSP Group in any one Zone); 
 any part of an Offshore Transmission System which connects directly to that GSP 
Group; and/or 
 any part of an Offshore Transmission System which connects to the onshore AC 
Transmission System at a point within the geographic area of that GSP Group.  
Interconnector BM Units are assigned a TLM of 1 and are therefore exempt from 
Transmission Losses. 
The TLM adjusted Metered Volume for each BM Unit is described as the BM Unit’s 
‘Credited Energy’. 
The Metered Volumes of Interconnector BM Units are not scaled for transmission losses. 
Where do we use transmission losses in imbalance pricing? 
The BOAs used to calculate the energy imbalance price are adjusted for transmission 
losses. This is done in the final calculation (see below). Balancing Services Adjustment 
Actions are adjusted by the SO before they are sent to the BSC Systems. 
Final energy imbalance price calculation 
For the final energy imbalance price calculation we take a volume-weighted average of the 
balancing actions, adjust them for transmission losses and add on the BPA/SPA. Section 4 
describes an example of how we do this. 
 
 
Where in the BSC? 
The transmission losses 
calculations are defined 
in Section T2 and Annex 
T-2. The TLM is then 
used in the final 
calculation in Section 
T4.4.2(a) and T4.4.3(a). 
 

25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 32 of 59 
Default rules – what happens when there is not enough priced 
volume? 
There are a number of default rules which apply when the data needed to carry out the 
pricing method is not available. 
Replacement Price 
In the situation where there is no Second Stage Unflagged Volume in the RPAR volume, 
the Replacement Price will be calculated using the Market Price for that Settlement Period. 
See Section 5 for an explanation of the Market Price pricing method. 
NIV and PAR 
Where there are no actions left in the NIV, the energy imbalance price will be set to equal 
the Market Price.  
In the situation where the volume of balancing actions is less than the PAR volume, the 
energy imbalance price will be a volume-weighted average of the system actions 
(whatever their volume). 
In the situation where the Market Price is zero and the NIV is made up of 100% Second 
Stage Flagged actions, the energy imbalance price will be also be zero. 
LOLP and the Reserve Scarcity Price  
If the SO doesn’t have a Gate Closure De-rated Margin Value to produce a Final LoLP 
Value, then it uses the next available De-rated Margin value (e.g. the two hours ahead 
forecast) to calculate a Final LoLP Value. Where no De-rated Margin Value is available to 
produce a Final LoLP Value, then LoLP will be null. This means that RSVP will be nil. 
 
Actions not included in the calculation of the energy imbalance 
price 
Applicable Balancing Services Volume Adjustment Data (ABSVD) 
Applicable Balancing Services Volume Adjustment Data (ABSVD) are volume adjustments 
to BM Units that are instructed by the SO to provide automatic frequency response and 
other non-BM balancing actions which are not accounted for elsewhere (and therefore 
these BM Units are in imbalance of their notified position). These volumes are identified 
post-event by the SO. The volume calculated is removed from the Party’s Energy Account 
and entered into the SO account. ABSVD is not included in the calculation of the energy 
imbalance price, as it is currently not possible to calculate the volume adjustments within 
the timescales for reporting the energy imbalance price (15 minutes after the end of the 
Settlement Period). 
 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 33 of 59 
4. Pricing calculation example 
This section provides an example of the energy imbalance price calculation based on a 
theoretical set of balancing actions. 
Energy imbalance price calculation processes 
This example will, step by step, go through the following nine stages of the calculation: 
1. Receive Balancing Actions (Includes SO-Flagging, CADL Flagging, Emergency Flagging); 
2. Determine STOR action price; 
3. Rank Buy Ranked Set and Sell Ranked Set; 
4. De Minimis Tagging and Arbitrage Tagging; 
5. Classification; 
6. Net Imbalance Volume (NIV) Tagging; 
7. Replacement Price; 
8. Price Average Reference Volume (PAR) Tagging; 
9. Buy Price Price Adjustment (BPA) / Sell Price Price Adjustment (SPA); and 
10. Transmission Loss Multiplier and the energy imbalance price calculation. 
 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 34 of 59 
1. Receive Balancing Actions (Includes SO-Flagging, CADL 
Flagged, Emergency Flagged) 
For each Settlement Period, the SO matches demand to generation in real time by using 
balancing actions (BOAs, TERRE Instructions and Balancing Services Adjustment Actions).  
BSC Systems aggregate TERRE Instruction volumes into Volume of GB need met (VGA), 
Replacement Reserve Aggregated Unpriced System Buy Actions (RRAUSB), and 
Replacement Reserve Aggregated Unpriced System Sell Actions (RRAUSS). 
The SO flags BOA’s balancing actions potentially impacted by system balancing issues (SO 
Flagging), as well as actions which have come from STOR providers (STOR Provider 
Flags). The BSC Systems flag actions which have duration less than CADL. SO-Flagged and 
CADL Flagged actions are collectively called First Stage Flagged balancing actions. In the 
example below, First Stage Flagged balancing actions are shown in blue stripes and First 
Stage Unflagged actions are shown in orange.  STOR Provider Flagged actions are shown 
in green. For simplicity the volumes are not shown to scale. 
 
 
Offer 
30MWh at £120/MWh 
Offer 
5MWh at £100/MWh 
Offer 
40MWh at £300/MWh 
Offer 
10MWh at £10/MWh 
Offer 
100MWh at £20/MWh 
Offer 
10MWh at £40/MWh 
Offer 
0.01MWh at £50/MWh 
VGB 
50MWh at £30/MWh 
Bid 
10MWh at £15/MWh 
Bid 
20MWh at -£30/MWh 
RRAUSS 
30MWh at £0/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
80MWh at £150/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
15MWh at £100/MWh 
BSAA - Sell 
10MWh at £4/MWh 
First Stage Flagged 
First Stage Unflagged 
STOR Provider flagged 
Key 
Offers 
 Bids 
Balancing Services 
Adjustment Actions 
(BSAA) 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 35 of 59 
2. Determine STOR action price 
STOR actions are identified by the System Operator using a STOR Provider Flag. For BM 
STOR the capacity’s bid offer acceptance (BOA) is flagged. Volumes for non-BM STOR are 
fed into the imbalance price as a Balancing Service Adjustment Action (BSAA), and these 
will also receive a STOR Provider Flag.  
Actions derived from BOAs and BSAAs that are STOR Provider Flagged, and that are 
accepted during STOR Availability Windows are included in the calculation of imbalance 
prices as individual STOR actions, with a price which is the greater of: 
 The Utilisation Price for an action (the price that STOR capacity is paid when it is 
called upon); and 
 The Reserve Scarcity Price (RSP), as determined by LoLP*VoLL.  
The Loss of Load Probability is determined using the De-rated Margin, in accordance with 
the Loss of Load Probability Calculation Statement. That LoLP is then multiplied by Value 
of VoLL to determine the RSP.  
In the example below, two actions have been flagged by the System Operator as having 
come from STOR providers, and the Settlement Period is during a STOR Availability 
window. The De-rated Margin at Gate Closure is 1,238MW, and this corresponds to a LoLP 
of 0.0334, as determined by the LoLP Calculation Statement. The Reserve Scarcity Price is 
therefore £200.40 (0.00334*£6,000).  
 
STOR actions then become first stage unflagged, and are treated like other BOAs and 
BSAAs for the next steps of price calculation (ranking, tagging, etc). Actions from STOR 
plant outside the STOR Availability Windows are not re-priced.  
 
Offer 
30MWh at £220/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
15MWh at £50/MWh 
Offer 
30MWh at £220/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
15MWh at £200.40/MWh 
Key 
STOR provider flagged 
First Stage Unflagged 
Re-priced 
Not re-priced 
 
What is De-Rated 
Margin? 
De-rated Margin is a 
measure of the excess 
supply on the system, 
which has been adjusted 
to take account of the 
likely availability of plant, 
specific to each type of 
generation technology. It 
reflects the proportion of 
an electricity source 
which is likely to be 
technically available to 
generate when needed. 
 

25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 36 of 59 
3. Formulate the Ranked Sets of balancing actions 
The balancing actions are separated into those that increase the energy on the 
Transmission System (buy balancing actions) and those that decrease the energy on the 
Transmission System (sell balancing actions). They are then ranked in price order - least 
expensive balancing action ranked first, and most expensive balancing action ranked last. 
In the diagram below, the direction of the Sell Ranked Set is opposite (the most expensive 
balancing action is at the bottom) to the direction of the Buy Ranked Set (the most 
expensive balancing action is at the top). The price ranking is indicated by the arrows. 
 
 
 
Offer 
30MWh at £120/MWh 
Offer 
5MWh at £100/MWh 
Offer 
40MWh at £300/MWh 
Offer 
10MWh at £10/MWh 
Offer 
100MWh at £20/MWh 
Offer 
10MWh at £40/MWh 
Offer 
0.01MWh at £50/MWh 
VGB 
50MWh at £30/MWh 
Bid 
10MWh at £15/MWh 
Bid 
20MWh at -£30/MWh 
RRAUSS  
30MWh at £0/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
80MWh at £150/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
15MWh at £100/MWh 
BSAA - Sell 
10MWh at £4/MWh 
First Stage Flagged 
First Stage Unflagged 
Key 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 37 of 59 
4. Remove De Minimis and Arbitrage actions 
Balancing actions which are less than DMAT are removed from the price stack. In the 
example below one action (0.01MWh at £50/MWh) is removed by De Minimis Tagging. 
In the example there is also a £10/MWh Offer and a £15/MWh Bid which can be removed 
though Arbitrage Tagging. Arbitrage Tagging removes equal volumes from each Ranked 
Set. 
 
 
 
 
Offer 
30MWh at £120/MWh 
Offer 
5MWh at £100/MWh 
Offer 
40MWh at £300/MWh 
Offer 
10MWh at £10/MWh 
Offer 
100MWh at £20/MWh 
Offer 
10MWh at £40/MWh 
Offer 
0.01MWh at £50/MWh 
VGB 
50MWh at £30/MWh 
Bid 
10MWh at £15/MWh 
Bid 
20MWh at -£30/MWh 
RRAUSS 
30MWh at £0/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
80MWh at £150/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
15MWh at £100/MWh 
BSAA - Sell 
10MWh at £4/MWh 
First Stage Flagged 
First Stage Unflagged 
Key 
De Minimis 
Arbitrage 
Arbitrage 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 38 of 59 
5. Classification 
Balancing actions which are First Stage Unflagged are energy balancing actions and so are 
reclassified as Second Stage Unflagged balancing actions.  
For each of the First Stage Flagged balancing actions, the BSC Systems consider whether 
there is a more expensive First Stage Unflagged balancing action. If there is, the First 
Stage Flagged balancing action is classified as a Second Stage Unflagged balancing action. 
If there is not, then the First Stage Flagged balancing action is classified as a Second 
Stage Flagged balancing action. 
In this example, the 10MWh at £40/MWh balancing action becomes Second Stage 
Unflagged. 
 
 
 
Offer 
30MWh at £120/MWh 
Offer 
5MWh at £100/MWh 
Offer 
40MWh at £300/MWh 
Offer 
100MWh at £20/MWh 
Offer 
10MWh at £40/MWh 
VGB 
50MWh at £30/MWh 
Bid 
20MWh at -£30/MWh 
RRAUSS 
30MWh at £0/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
80MWh at £150/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
15MWh at £100/MWh 
BSAA - Sell 
10MWh at £4/MWh 
First Stage Flagged 
First Stage Unflagged 
Key 
Offer 
30MWh at £120/MWh 
Offer 
5MWh at £100/MWh 
Offer 
40MWh at £300/MWh 
unpriced 
Offer 
100MWh at £20/MWh 
Offer 
10MWh at £40/MWh 
Offer 
50MWh at £30/MWh 
Bid 
20MWh at -£30/MWh  
RRAUSS  
30MWh at £0/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
35MWh at £150/MWh 
unpriced 
BSAA - Buy 
15MWh at £100/MWh 
Second Stage Flagged 
Second Stage Unflagged 
BSAA - Sell 
10MWh at £4/MWh 
 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 39 of 59 
6. Net Imbalance Volume (NIV) Tagging 
In order to establish the NIV, the volume of the smaller Sell stack is removed from the top 
of the larger Buy stack. The Sell stack has a volume of 60MWh. The corresponding volume 
at the top of the Buy stack removes the top Offer (40MWh), and 20MWh of the next Offer. 
 
 
 
Key 
Offer 
30MWh at £120/MWh 
Offer 
5MWh at £100/MWh 
Offer 
40MWh at £300/MWh  
Offer 
100MWh at £20/MWh 
Offer 
10MWh at £40/MWh 
VGB 
50MWh at £30/MWh 
BSAA - Sell 
10MWh at £4/MWh 
 
BSAA - Buy 
35MWh at £150/MWh  
BSAA - Buy 
15MWh at £100/MWh 
Second Stage Flagged 
Second Stage Unflagged 
Offer 
30MWh at £120/MWh 
Offer 
5MWh at £100/MWh 
Offer 
100MWh at £20/MWh 
Offer 
10MWh at £40/MWh 
VGB 
50MWh at £30/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
15MWh at £150/MWh  
BSAA - Buy 
15MWh at £100/MWh 
285MWh 
60MWh 
225MWh 
RRAUSS  
30MWh at £0/MWh 
Bid 
20MWh at -£30/MWh  
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 40 of 59 
7. Replacement Price 
BSC Systems assign a Replacement Price to any Second Stage Flagged balancing actions. 
In the example there is a Second Stage Flagged 15MWh balancing action. 
The Replacement Price is calculated from a volume-weighted average of the most 
expensive 1MWh of priced balancing actions. For this example, the most expensive 1MWh 
of priced balancing actions is set at £120/MWh.  
Once the Second Stage Flagged balancing action is repriced, it is considered as a Second 
Stage Unflagged balancing action. 
Once the Replacement Price process has been completed, all balancing actions are Second 
Stage Unflagged. 
 
Key 
Second Stage Flagged 
Second Stage Unflagged 
Offer 
30MWh at £120/MWh 
Offer 
5MWh at £100/MWh 
Offer 
100MWh at £20/MWh 
Offer 
10MWh at £40/MWh 
VGB 
50MWh at £30/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
15MWh at £150/MWh  
BSAA - Buy 
15MWh at £100/MWh 
Offer 
30MWh at £120/MWh 
Offer 
5MWh at £100/MWh 
Offer 
100MWh at £20/MWh 
Offer 
10MWh at £40/MWh 
VGB 
50MWh at £30/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
15MWh at £120/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
15MWh at £100/MWh 
Re-priced 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 41 of 59 
8. Price Average Reference Volume (PAR) Tagging 
The final tagging rule is PAR Tagging. With PAR Tagging, a volume-weighted average of 
the 1MWh of most expensive actions is used to calculate the final energy imbalance price. 
In the example the volume of the NIV is 225MWh and PAR Tagging will use the most 
expensive 1MWh. 
Where there are two actions with the same price that are both the most expensive tagged 
action, PAR tagging will proportionally tag both actions to get the volume-weighted 
average of the 1MWh of most expensive actions. 
 
 
9. Buy Price Price Adjustment (BPA) / Sell Price Price 
Adjustment (SPA) 
The NIV is positive so we use the BPA (as opposed to the SPA). For this Settlement Period, 
the BPA which the SO sent to us is £5/MWh. See Appendix 3 for more information about 
how the SO calculates the BPA and SPA. 
 
  
Key 
Second Stage Unflagged 
Offer 
30MWh at £120/MWh 
Offer 
5MWh at £100/MWh 
Offer 
100MWh at £20/MWh 
Offer 
10MWh at £40/MWh 
VGB 
50MWh at £30/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
15MWh at £120/MWh 
BSAA - Buy 
15MWh at £100/MWh 
Offer 
0.667MWh at £120/MWh 
PAR volume 
  
NIV 
  
BSAA - Buy 
0.333MWh at £120/MWh 
 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 42 of 59 
10. Transmission Loss Multiplier and final energy imbalance price 
calculation  
For this Settlement Period the Transmission Loss Multiplier is assumed to be: 
 For the BMU delivering the Offer of 0.667MWh at £120/MWh 0.99051 
TLMs are not applied to Balancing Services Adjustment Actions as the adjustment has 
already been made by the SO. In the example the 0.333MWh at £120/MWh balancing 
action is not TLM adjusted. 
Volume weighted average of PAR = ((0.667MWh x £120/MWh x 0.99051) +(0.333MWh 
x £120/MWh) / ((0.667MWh x 0.99051) + 0.333MWh) 
Volume weighted average of PAR = £120.00 
System Buy Price  = £120.00 + £5/MWh 
System Buy Price = £125.00/MWh 
 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 43 of 59 
5. How does the Market Price work? 
Introduction 
The Market Price is used as the imbalance price when there are no actions left after 
flagging and tagging (i.e. NIV = 0). This price reflects the wholesale electricity price. The 
method for calculating the Market Price is set out in BSC Section T4.3A based upon 
Market Index Data (MID) received from each Market Index Data Provider (MIDP). 
The formula for Market Index Data is set out in the Market Index Definition 
Statement (MIDS). The Market Price is calculated for every Settlement Period. 
 
The Market Index Definition Statement 
The Market Price is based on trading in the ‘short-term’ market. The current version of 
the MIDS is always available on the BSC Website. The MIDS can only be changed with 
Ofgem’s approval after industry consultation. 
The Market Price is derived from trades made on power exchanges. Any power exchange 
trading energy in the GB market can potentially be appointed as a MIDP. However, in 
order to accurately reflect a market price in the ‘short-term’ market, power exchanges with 
a significant market share of spot market trades are more likely to be appointed. 
Each MIDP is required to derive a Market Index Price (MIP) and a Market Index 
Volume (MIV) which, in combination, are referred to as MID for each Settlement Period. 
The data is calculated by each MIDP in accordance with the MIDS. The MIDP is required to 
send MID on a Settlement Period basis to the BSC Systems. 
The MIDS contains a description of the ‘qualifying products’, which are types of contract 
traded on the power exchanges from which the MIP and MIV are derived. The MIDS also 
sets out the time and qualifying product weightings that should be applied when 
calculating MID. 
In order to reduce the likelihood that the Market Price is set by a single trade, there is an 
Individual Liquidity Threshold (ILT). The ILT is the minimum volume of qualifying 
products that must be equalled or exceeded for a MIDP’s data to contribute to setting the 
Market Price in that Settlement Period. This is set high enough to reduce the likelihood 
that the MIP is set on a single trade, but low enough that it minimises the number of 
Settlement Periods where the MIP cannot be calculated, and hence defaults to the main 
energy imbalance price. 
MIDS – Structure and method 
The MIDS splits the period deemed to constitute ‘short term’ into defined timebands. 
Products traded in the timebands near to real time are weighted more, to ensure that they 
have a more proportionate effect on the Market Index Price. The MIDP is required to 
provide functionality for weighting qualifying products/timeband combinations by values 
from 0 to 1. 
With Ofgem’s approval, the BSC Panel may from time to time adjust the MIDS parameters 
(qualifying products, weightings and ILT) which define the subset of power exchange 
trades and data used for calculating the Market Price. 
 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 44 of 59 
6. Imbalance charges 
How do the BSC Systems calculate Parties’ imbalance volumes? 
A Party’s imbalance position is simply its Metered Volumes compared to its contracted 
volumes. The contracted volumes are adjusted for any accepted Bids and Offers or 
delivery of Balancing Services. 
Energy imbalance volume = Energy – (Balancing Services + contracts) 
This results in a positive or negative volume of imbalance. 
A negative imbalance volume means that a Party has under-contracted and is therefore 
short of energy. A positive imbalance volume means that a Party has over-contracted and 
is therefore long on energy. The BSC Systems calculate the imbalance volumes for all 
Parties for every Settlement Period. 
How do the BSC Systems calculate Parties’ imbalance cashflows? 
Once the BSC Systems know Parties’ imbalance positions, they can calculate Parties’ 
cashflows (imbalance charges) for each Settlement Period: 
Energy imbalance cashflow = Energy imbalance volume x imbalance price 
 
When are Parties billed for imbalance charges? 
In order to accurately calculate imbalance charges, a complete set of metered data is 
required. This presents a problem. The data is readily available for sites metered Half 
Hourly. However, for Non Half Hourly sites the metered data will not be available until the 
Meter is read manually. Because of this, the BSC Systems carry out a number of 
Settlement Runs at pre-defined points during the year (the Settlement Calendar). 
 
 
In addition to the Settlement Runs shown above, an Interim Information (II) Settlement 
Run is calculated 5 Working Days after the Settlement Date.  The II Run is for information 
only and no Parties are charged/credited after this run. 
After the SF Run (and after all subsequent Reconciliation Runs – R1, R2, R3 and RF), 
invoices are generated and sent out to Parties by the Funds Administration Agent (FAA). 
The payment date for the SF run is always 29 calendar days after the Settlement Date. If 
any volumes at RF are still under dispute then another run (DF) can be carried out when 
the corrected data has been received.  Any Party can raise a Dispute but it is the decision 
of the Trading Disputes Committee as to whether a DF Run is carried out. 
 
SF 
R1 
RF 
DF 
~ 28 Months 
~ 1month 
~ 2 months 
~4 months 
~ 7 months 
~ 14 months 
Settlement Date 
R3 
R2 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 45 of 59 
7. Imbalance pricing data 
Publishing data on the BMRS 
Imbalance pricing data is published on the Balancing Mechanism Reporting Service (BMRS) 
by the Balancing Mechanism Reporting Agent (BMRA). The BMRS is available in two 
services: 
 The High Grade service is a dedicated private communications network used by the 
BMRS to actively publish data to subscribing participants as soon as it is available; 
and 
 The Low Grade service is the public website, http://www.bmreports.com, on which 
we publish the data. 
Data is available to the High and Low Grade services at the same time, but if a Party is 
accessing the Low Grade service it will need to use the Refresh facility to retrieve the 
latest data as it becomes available. 
The following imbalance pricing data is available on the BMRS for each Settlement Period: 
 FPNs 
 Bid-Offer Pairs 
 BOAs (including SO-Flagging details) 
 TERRE Instructions 
 TERRE auction results 
 BSAD 
 Market Price 
 De-Rated Margin 
 Loss of Load Probability 
 Reserve Scarcity Price 
 NIV  
 SBP/SSP 
 
Settlement Reports 
The Settlement Run information is reported through the Settlement Administration Agent 
(SAA) I014 ‘Settlement Reports’ (SAA-I014). The SAA produces three variants of the 
SAA-I014 for each Settlement Run for each Settlement Period: 
 SAA-I014 sub-flow 1 – Parties’ versions; 
 SAA-I014 sub-flow 2 – SO version; and 
 SAA-I014 sub-flow 3 – BSCCo (ELEXON) version. 
The SAA-I014 is electronically sent to the above recipients on a daily basis (so each daily 
SAA-I014 contains all the Settlement Run data for that day). The SAA-I014 sub-flow 2 is 
also available to any BSC Party that wants to download it. 
The SAA-I014 contains all the data a Party needs to understand its imbalance position for 
each Settlement Period. The SAA-I014 sub-flow 1 is tailored for each Party (so only 
contains data for that Party). The SAA-I014 sub-flow 2 contains data for all Parties. This 
includes: 
 Party imbalance charges; 
 Bid-Offer Pairs; 
 BOAs (including SO-Flagging details); 
 BSAD; 
 Market Price; and 
 NIV. 
 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 46 of 59 
8. Glossary 
Glossary 
Applicable Balancing 
Services Volume Data 
(ABSVD) 
Volume adjustments to BM Units that are instructed by the SO 
to provide automatic frequency response These volumes are 
identified post-event by the SO using a set of matrices of 
frequency response for each individual BM Unit that provides 
the service. 
Arbitrage Tagging Arbitrage occurs when the price of a Buy balancing action is 
lower than the price of a Sell balancing action. In cases of 
arbitrage, equivalent Sell balancing actions and Buy balancing 
actions are excluded from the energy imbalance price 
calculation. 
Balancing action Either a Bid-Offer Acceptance or a Balancing Services 
Adjustment Action which is taken by the SO to balance the 
Transmission System. 
Balancing and 
Settlement Code (BSC) 
The BSC contains the rules and governance arrangements for 
electricity balancing and settlement in Great Britain and all 
licensed electricity companies must sign it (others may choose 
to do so). 
Balancing Mechanism 
Units (BMUs) 
BMUs represent the generation or consumption at a particular 
location. Each Party is assigned BMUs for their Power Stations 
or areas of demand. The BSC Systems sum up a Party’s BMU 
volumes and contracts when they carry out the Settlement 
calculations. 
Balancing Services 
Adjustment Action 
Where the SO takes a balancing action outside the Balancing 
Mechanism, it inputs it into the BSC Systems as a Balancing 
Services Adjustment Action. 
Balancing Services 
Adjustment Data 
(BSAD) 
Balancing Services outside of the Balancing Mechanism are 
submitted using Balancing Services Adjustment Data (BSAD). 
Bid A Bid is a proposal on the Balancing Mechanism to reduce 
generation or increase demand. 
Bid-Offer Acceptance 
(BOA) 
An Offer or Bid which has been accepted by the SO to balance 
the Transmission System. 
BSC Panel The BSC Panel is the industry committee charged with 
ensuring the provisions of the BSC are carried out correctly 
and in such a manner as will promote the SO’s Transmission 
Licence obligations, the efficient, economic and co-ordinated 
operation of the Transmission System and effective 
competition in the generation, supply, sale and purchase of 
electricity. 
BSC Parties (Parties) Organisations which have signed up to the Balancing and 
Settlement Code. 
Buy Price Price 
Adjustment (BPA) 
The BPA is a reflection of the costs to the SO of regulating 
reserve and BM start-up. It is added when the NIV is positive. 
CADL Flagged A BOA which is less than the CADL in duration and has been 
flagged by the BSC Systems. 
CADL Flagging BOAs which are less than the CADL in duration are flagged by 
the BSC Systems. 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 47 of 59 
Glossary 
Classification The process by which the BSC Systems distinguish whether a 
First Stage Flagged Action is an energy balancing or a system 
balancing action. 
Continuous Acceptance 
Duration Limit (CADL) 
The time limit that distinguishes between short-duration 
balancing actions. The current CADL is 10 minutes, as it 
reduced on 1 April 2019 from 15 minutes. It may be altered 
by the BSC Panel with Ofgem’s approval, after consultation 
with the SO and Parties.  
De Minimis Acceptance 
Threshold (DMAT) 
The DMAT is 1MWh. The Panel can alter the DMAT with 
Ofgem’s approval after consultation with the SO and Parties. 
On 1 April 2019, DMAT reduced from 1MWh to 0.1MWh. 
De Minimis Tagging Balancing actions with a volume less than DMAT are 
completely removed from the energy imbalance price 
calculation. 
Demand Control A last resort balancing action if the System Operator is unable 
to call on Bids and Offers or other Balancing Services to meet 
the current demand.  When the SO issues a ‘Demand Control 
Instruction’ it will instruct the Distribution Network Operators 
to reduce demand on their Distribution Systems, either 
through reducing voltage across the network and/or 
disconnecting consumers. 
Demand Control 
Instruction  
An instruction from the SO to the Distribution Network 
Operators to reduce demand on their Distribution Systems, 
either through reducing voltage across the network and/or 
disconnecting consumers. 
Demand Control 
Volume   
The amount of electricity that is subject to a Demand Control 
Instruction 
De-Rated Margin De-rated Margin is a measure of the excess supply on the 
system, which has been adjusted to take account of the likely 
availability of plant, specific to each type of generation 
technology. It reflects the proportion of an electricity source 
which is likely to be technically available to generate when 
needed. 
Distribution Network The lower voltage network which supplies electricity from the 
Transmission System to customers. 
Emergency Acceptance An Emergency Instruction taken for energy balancing reasons. 
Emergency Flagged An Emergency Instruction taken for potentially system 
balancing reasons. 
Energy balancing Balancing actions taken to balance the short-term energy 
imbalance of the Transmission System. 
Energy imbalance price The energy imbalance price is calculated using the balancing 
actions that the SO accepted for that Settlement Period. 
Parties will pay the energy imbalance price when they are 
short, and are paid the energy imbalance price when they are 
long. 
Energy Contract 
Volume Aggregation 
Agent (ECVAA) 
The BSC System responsible for aggregating ECVNs. 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 48 of 59 
Glossary 
Energy Contract 
Volume Notification 
(ECVN) 
A notification of a bilateral contract between Parties. ECVNs 
must be submitted before the beginning of the relevant 
Settlement period. 
Final Physical 
Notification (FPN) 
Once Gate Closure has occurred for a Settlement Period the 
latest Physical Notifications become Final Physical 
Notifications. 
First Stage Flagged 
balancing action 
A balancing action taken for potentially system balancing 
reasons (SO-Flagged, Emergency Flagged or CADL Flagged). 
First Stage Unflagged 
balancing action 
An energy balancing action. At Classification, a First Stage 
Unflagged balancing action will automatically become a 
Second Stage Unflagged balancing action. It will also keep its 
original price. 
Gate Closure One hour before each Settlement Period the physical positions 
of Parties are frozen.  
Generators Organisations that produce electricity. 
Individual Liquidity 
Threshold (ILT) 
The ILT sets a minimum requirement for the volume of trades 
in a given Settlement Period for each MIDP. The ILT is 
currently set to 25MWh and can be altered through a change 
to the Market Index Definition Statement by the Panel with 
Ofgem’s approval and after industry consultation. 
Largest Loss Reserve  The Largest Loss Reserve represents the margin that the SO 
will always hold to protect against the instantaneous loss of 
the prevailing largest infeed into the system (e.g. a large 
generator). 
Loss of Load 
Probability (LOLP) 
Loss of Load Probability (LOLP) is a measure of reliability that 
will be calculated for each Settlement Period. For a given level 
of MW demand on the system the associated LoLP indicates 
the probability that there will be insufficient generating supply 
to meet the capacity requirement. This methodology is set out 
in the Loss of Load Probability Calculation Statement. Since 1 
November 2018, the dynamic method has been used to 
calculate LOLP. 
Market Index Data 
(MID) 
The combination of Market Index Price and Market Index 
Volume derived by each MIDP for each Settlement Period. 
Market Index Data 
Provider (MIDP) 
A provider of Market Index Data. 
Market Index 
Definition Statement 
(MIDS) 
The MIDS sets out the method for calculating the Market Price 
Market Index Price 
(MIP) 
The price derived by each MIDP for each Settlement Period 
based on the short-term trades on its power exchanges made 
in accordance with the MIDS. 
Market Index Volume 
(MIV) 
The volume derived by each MIDP for each Settlement Period 
based on the short-term trades on its power exchanges made 
in accordance with the MIDS. 
Market Price The Market Price is calculated from the MID received from 
each MIDP for each Settlement Period. It is intended to reflect 
the price a Party would have obtained if it had bought or sold 
its imbalance on a power exchange. 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 49 of 59 
Glossary 
National Grid Electricity 
System Operator 
(NETSO) 
From 1 April 2019, the Electricity System Operator became 
known as National Grid Electricity System Operator (NETSO), 
following its legal separation from National Grid Electricity 
Transmission (NGET). It remains part of the National Grid 
Group. 
Net Imbalance Volume 
(NIV) 
The remaining volume following NIV Tagging. 
Net Imbalance Volume 
Tagging 
The volume of the Buy balancing actions are netted off 
against the volume of Sell balancing actions so that only the 
Net Imbalance Volume is used in the final calculation. 
Offer An Offer is a proposal on the Balancing Mechanism to 
increase generation or reduce demand. 
Physical Notifications Physical Notifications contain details of a generator’s expected 
level of generation or a Supplier’s expected level of demand. 
Generators and Suppliers must submit Physical Notifications 
for each BMU to the SO for each Settlement Period. 
Price Average 
Reference volume 
(PAR) 
The Price Average Reference volume is the most expensively 
priced 1MWh of balancing actions in the Net Imbalance 
Volume. 
Ranked Set Once all the BSC Systems have received all the balancing 
actions from the SO they are ranked in price order in two 
separate Ranked Sets (one for all the Sell balancing actions 
and one for Buy balancing actions). 
Reserve Scarcity Price  A pricing mechanism used to re-price balancing actions from 
STOR plant when they are used during STOR Availability 
Windows, and when their Utilisation Prices are lower than the 
Reserve Scarcity Price.  The RSP is determined by LoLP*VoLL. 
Replacement Price The price assigned to Second Stage Flagged balancing actions 
which enter the Net Imbalance Volume. The Replacement 
Price is calculated from a volume-weighted average of the 
most expensively priced 1MWh of priced actions.  
Replacement Price 
Average Reference 
volume (RPAR) 
The Replacement Price is calculated from a volume-weighted 
average of the most expensively priced 1MWh of priced 
actions. This is known as the Replacement Price Average 
Reference Volume (RPAR). 
Replacement Reserve 
Aggregated Unpriced 
System Buy Actions 
(RRAUSB) 
Unpriced volume resulting from GB or International need for a 
volume of positive (buy stack) balancing energy. 
Replacement Reserve 
Aggregated Unpriced 
System Sell Actions 
(RRAUSS) 
Unpriced volume resulting from GB/International need for a 
volume of negative (sell stack) balancing energy. 
Second Stage Flagged 
balancing action 
A system balancing action which becomes repriced by the 
Replacement Price. 
Second Stage 
Unflagged balancing 
action 
An energy balancing action which keeps its original price. 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 50 of 59 
Glossary 
Sell Price Price 
Adjustment (SPA) 
The SPA is a reflection of option fees for negative reserve and 
forward contracts. It is added when the Net Imbalance 
Volume is positive. 
Settlement Period The basic trading period for electricity is half an hour and is 
called a Settlement Period. Each day is split into 48 
Settlement Period units (unless it is a day where the clocks 
change, which has either 46 or 50 half hours). 
Short Term Operating 
Reserve (STOR) 
One form of balancing reserve procured by the SO.  
SO-Flagged A balancing action which has been flagged by the SO. 
SO-Flagging The process by which the SO identifies or ‘flags’ balancing 
actions which have been impacted by transmission 
constraints. 
STOR Availability 
Window 
The time during which providers of STOR are required to be 
available.  
STOR Provider Flag A flag which identifies a STOR provider.  
Submission Deadline The time at which a Parties contracted position must be 
notified to ELEXON. This is currently set at before the start of 
the relevant Settlement Period. 
Suppliers Organisations that supply electricity to their customers. 
System balancing Balancing actions taken for non-energy, system-management 
reasons. 
System Buy Price 
(SBP) 
If a Party has under-generated or over-demanded it will have 
to buy that shortfall of energy from the Transmission System. 
To do this it pays System Buy Price (SBP). 
System Management 
Action Flagging 
Methodology 
Statement 
The statement required by the Transmission License which 
details the SO’s methodology for SO-Flagging. 
System Operator (SO) National Electricity Transmission System Operator (NETSO) is 
the System Operator (SO), and is required to balance the 
Transmission System.  
System Sell Price (SSP) If a Party has over-generated or under-demanded it will have 
to sell that extra energy to the Transmission System. To do 
this it is paid System Sell Price (SSP). 
Transmission 
constraint 
Any limit on the ability of the Transmission System, or any 
part of it, to transmit power to a location which demands it. 
Transmission Loss 
Multiplier (TLM) 
The value calculated for each Settlement Period and used to 
scale each BM Unit’s Metered Volume for Settlement 
depending on the season and the BM Unit’s geographical 
zone. Transmission losses are allocated so that: 
 45% of losses are allocated across non-Interconnector BM 
Units in net delivering Trading Units; 
 55% of losses are allocated across non-Interconnector BM 
Units in net offtaking Trading Units; and 
 Interconnector BM Units have a TLM of 1 applied and 0% 
of losses are allocated to these BM Units. 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 51 of 59 
Glossary 
Transmission System The high voltage network that transports electricity 
throughout Great Britain. The Transmission System delivers 
electricity to the lower voltage Distribution Networks which in 
turn supply electricity to customers. 
Transmission System 
length / net imbalance 
The net imbalance of the Transmission System. When there is 
not enough generation is Transmission System is ‘short’. 
When there is too much generation the Transmission System 
is ‘long’. 
Trans European 
Replacement Reserves 
Exchange (TERRE) 
A platform for trading balancing services volumes between 
participating System Operators. 
Value of Lost Load 
(VoLL) 
VoLL is a defined parameter in the BSC and is based on an 
assessment of the average value that electricity consumers 
attribute to the security of supply. It is currently set at 
£6,000/MWh. 
Volume of GB need 
met (VGB) 
The volume of GB need that has been met by trades through 
the TERRE platform. 
Voltage Reduction  One action that Distribution Network Operators can take 
following a Demand Control Instruction.  
 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 52 of 59 
9. Appendix 1 – The Reserve Scarcity Price  
What is Short Term Operating Reserve (STOR)? 
In addition to balancing actions called upon in the balancing mechanism, the SO can enter 
into contracts with capacity to deliver when called upon. These additional sources of 
power are referred to as reserve. Most of the reserve that the SO procures is called Short 
Term Operating Reserve (STOR). 
The SO procures STOR ahead of time via a competitive tender process. Under STOR 
contracts, availability payments are made to the balancing service provider in return for 
the capacity being made available to the SO during specific times (STOR Availability 
Windows). When STOR is called upon, the SO pays for its use at a pre-agreed price (its 
Utilisation Price).  Some STOR is dispatched in the balancing mechanism (BM STOR) while 
some is dispatched separately (Non-BM STOR). 
All STOR is included in the calculation of Imbalance Prices as STOR Actions. The price 
attributed to a STOR Action depends on its Utilisation Price and prevailing market 
conditions. 
Why are STOR Actions re-priced?  
STOR Actions may be re-priced because of how STOR is procured by the SO, and how this 
can affect how its costs are reflected in the imbalance price calculation.  
There are two main differences between how STOR is procured compared to most 
balancing energy (e.g. bids and offers in the balancing mechanism). Firstly STOR is 
procured by the System Operator before it is needed, sometimes months before it is 
actually used. This means that the price paid to STOR capacity when it is used (its 
Utilisation Price) has been pre-agreed in a STOR contract. Prices for bids and offers 
submitted into the balancing mechanism, on the other hand, can be updated up until an 
hour ahead of the beginning of a Settlement Period (Gate Closure). Secondly STOR 
providers also receive availability payments for the periods when they are available for the 
SO. This separate stream of revenue means that – unlike Bids and Offers accepted in the 
balancing mechanism – STOR providers do not earn all their revenue when they are 
utilised. 
The combination of these two factors means that the Utilisation Prices STOR plant are paid 
when called upon may be noticeably different to the price the SO may have paid had it 
called upon a non-STOR balancing mechanism action. To correct this, we now use a 
pricing mechanism to determine a Reserve Scarcity Price which can be applied to STOR 
actions. 
Key terms: The Reserve Scarcity Function (RSVP), Loss of Load 
Probability (LoLP) and Value of Lost Load (VoLL) 
The Reserve Scarcity Price function is a pricing mechanism designed to respond to 
system scarcity so that STOR Actions better reflect prevailing market conditions. The 
pricing function produces the Reserve Scarcity Price (RSVP) that rises as the system gets 
tighter (i.e. the gap between available and required generation narrows). 
The RSP is calculated for each settlement period as the product of a measure of system 
reliability called Loss of Load Probability (LoLP) and the Value of Lost Load (VoLL). 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 53 of 59 
The LoLP is a measure of reliability that will be calculated for each Settlement Period. For 
a given level of MW demand on the system the associated LoLP indicates the probability 
that there will be insufficient generating supply to meet the capacity requirement.  LOLP is 
a value between 0 and 1. 
STOR is designed to protect against emergency actions, such as Demand Control actions, 
which may result in customers being disconnected. If customers are disconnected, these 
volumes are priced at the Value of Lost Load (VoLL). VoLL is a defined parameter in 
the BSC and is based on an assessment of the average value that electricity consumers 
attribute to the security of supply. It is currently set at £6,000/MWh1. 
Based on the principle that the chance of load being lost increases as the margin tightens, 
the RSVP is calculated as the product of: 
 the LoLP, as determined by the SO at Gate Closure for each Settlement Period; 
and 
 the Value of Lost Load (VoLL), currently set at £6,000/MWh. 
How are STOR actions re-priced? 
Capacity that provide STOR are first identified by the System Operator using a ‘STOR 
Provider Flag’. For BM STOR the relevant bid offer acceptance (BOA) is flagged. Volumes 
for non-BM STOR are fed into the imbalance price as a Balancing Service Adjustment 
Action (BSAA), which will also receive a STOR Provider flag. 
All STOR is included in the calculation of Imbalance Prices but if STOR Actions are 
accepted during STOR Availability Windows they may be re-priced. They are included 
in the calculation of imbalance prices as individual actions, with a price which is the 
greater of: 
 The Utilisation Price for an action (the price that STOR capacity is paid when it is 
called upon); and 
 The Reserve Scarcity Price (RSVP), as determined by LoLP*VoLL. 
                                                            
1 In accordance with Approved Modification P305, the VoLL has risen to £6000/MWh since 1 November 2018. 
Prior to this, VoLL was set at £3,000/MWh. 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 54 of 59 
 
Re-priced STOR actions are then treated like other BOAs for the next steps of price 
calculation (ranking, tagging, etc). Actions from STOR plant outside the STOR Availability 
Windows are not re-priced. 
How does the SO calculate LoLP? 
LoLP is a measure of reliability that is calculated for each Settlement Period.  It reflects the 
probability that there will be insufficient generating supply to meet a given level of 
demand. The full LoLP calculation is set out in the LoLP Methodology Calculation 
Statement. At its simplest, the metric measures the probability that available generation 
will be greater than the capacity requirement, i.e.: 
LoLP = P(Z – D < 0) 
Z represents generation, where  
Z = De-Rated conventional generation + wind forecast 
D represents demand, where: 
D = System Demand + Largest Loss Reserve – Non-BM STOR 
Generating capacity reflects the De-rated Margin of available conventional plant 
(including BM STOR plant). De-rated Margin is a measure of the excess supply on the 
system, which has been adjusted to take account of the likely availability of plant, specific 
to each type of generation technology. It reflects the proportion of an electricity source 
which is likely to be technically available to generate when needed. 
Total System Demand includes a measure of demand for GB customers, interconnector 
flows (exports are positive; imports are negative), transmission losses on the transmission 
network and the demand from power stations. The Largest Loss Reserve represents the 
margin that the SO will always hold to protect against the instantaneous loss of the 
prevailing largest infeed into the system (eg a large generator).  Non-BM STOR volumes 
are subtracted as they are not included in the conventional generation calculation. 
Dynamic Methods 
Action retains 
original price 
Does the action relate to a Settlement 
Period during a STOR availability window?  
Is the action’s Utilisation Price greater or less than the 
Reserve Scarcity Price?  
Action is re-priced at Reserve Scarcity Price 
No 
RSP < 
Utilisation 
 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
RSP > 
Utilisation 
Does the action relate to a BOA or BSAA that has a STOR 
Provider Flag? 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 55 of 59 
Since 1 November 2018, LoLP has been calculated using a dynamic function. The SO 
calculates LoLP for each settlement period using up-to-date information and sends this to 
ELEXON for use in the Imbalance Price Calculation. More information on this function can 
be found in the Loss of Load Probability Statement. 
When is LOLP published? 
In the run-up to Gate Closure, ELEXON publishes the Transmission Company’s forecasts of 
the De-rated Margin and Indicative LoLPs on the BMRS. Forecasts are published, as a 
minimum, at midday the day before the relevant settlement period, as well as eight, four, 
two and one hour(s) prior to the start of each Settlement Period. The one hour ahead 
(Gate Closure) value is used to determine the Final LoLP, which is used in the calculation 
of the RSP for that Settlement Period. Participants can use the forecast information to 
derive their own estimate of the LoLP value in the run-up to Gate Closure, and the 
intention is that this provides a better signal of potentially tightening margins. 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 56 of 59 
10. Appendix 2 – Demand Control actions 
The SO can use Demand Control actions, only as a last resort to balance the system in the 
rare event that there is insufficient capacity in the market to meet demand If used they 
will be included in the imbalance price calculation at a price of Value of Lost Load (VoLL).  
What is Demand Control? 
If the SO is unable to call on Bids and Offers or other Balancing Services to meet the 
current demand, then it can instruct Demand Control as a last resort emergency action to 
manage the situation. When it issues a ‘Demand Control Instruction’ it will instruct the 
Distribution Network Operators to reduce demand on their Distribution Systems, either 
through reducing voltage across the network and/or disconnecting consumers. 
Reflecting Demand Control in the imbalance price 
For each Settlement Period affected by a Demand Control Event, the Transmission 
Company will provide ELEXON with an estimate of the volume associated with the Demand 
Control Instructions on a per DNO basis. This volume (the Demand Control Volume) is 
included in the Imbalance Price calculation as if it was an Offer priced at VoLL. It is then 
subject to the normal rules for calculating the Imbalance Price, including the flagging and 
tagging rules. The Transmission Company has a reasonable endeavours requirement to 
provide to ELEXON an estimate of the volumes in time for the indicative Imbalance Price 
calculated 15 minutes after a Settlement Period. 
Reflecting Demand Control in suppliers’ imbalance positions  
Demand Control Events will also affect the imbalance positions of the suppliers of those 
customers who have been disconnected. In particular, Demand Control will show as lower 
demand and these suppliers will have a ‘longer’ imbalance position than they would have 
otherwise had. 
A ‘bottom-up’ approach is used to calculate the likely impact of Demand Control on 
individual Supplier BM Units, i.e. specifically a Demand Disconnection volume2, which is 
used to correct affected suppliers’ imbalance positions to reflect their likely position had 
their not been Demand Control. This approach involves identifying the individual 
customers affected and estimating what they would have consumed had the disconnection 
not taken place. ELEXON add this estimate of consumption (minus an estimate for any 
voluntary actions requested by the SO, such as demand side Non-BM STOR) to suppliers’ 
imbalance positions as Balancing Services. This adjusts their imbalance position back to 
what it would have been had their customers not been subjected to the involuntary 
disconnections. This process is carried out in time for the Initial Settlement Run (SF). This 
process is set out in more detail in BSC Section S, the BSCPs and in the Demand Control 
Guidance Document. 
                                                            
2 At this stage, a method for estimating and adjusting imbalance volumes to reflect Voltage Reduction actions has 
not been developed. 
 
Where in the BSC? 
The processes relating to 
Demand Control 
Instructions are set out in 
Section Q.6.9 
 

25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 57 of 59 
11. Appendix 3 – The BPA and SPA 
The BPA/SPA is a reflection of the costs to the SO of regulating reserve and BM start-up. 
The SPA is made up of option fees for negative reserve and forward contracts. 
In practice, the BPA impacts the energy imbalance price calculation more frequently than 
the SPA. This is primarily because option fees for negative reserve and forward contracts 
occur relatively infrequently compared with regulating reserve and BM start-up availability 
fees. 
BM start up 
The SO instructs BM start up units to meet identified additional plant requirements over 
the peaks. The SO does this for a requirement period (or ‘window’). The costs of BM start-
up are then targeted at the Settlement Periods within this window. 
The BM start up component (BPA BMSU) is procured on the day. The cost is allocated 
through the BPA based on the requirement window. The option fee for BM start up is paid 
hourly from the time it is instructed and not in full at the time of instruction. 
As an example, assume that the SO concurrently instructs three BM start-ups at an eight 
hour lead time to meet a requirement of 1500MW for two hours in the future. Each BM 
start-up provides 500MW. Getting closer to the requirement window, the SO requires less 
of the BM start-up plant and progressively cancels the prior instructions as shown in the 
diagram below. All BM start up in the example is paid at a rate of £2000/hr. 
 
BM start-up component example 
 
BPA BMSU is then calculated based on summing the per-hour cost of the BM start-ups 
instructed (and not cancelled) and dividing it by the MWh requirement for that hour. This 
gives a cost in £/MWh for that hour. These are then summed from the initial instruction 
until the target time (or the last BM start-up is cancelled). This cost is then allocated to 
each Settlement Period within the requirement window in which the system is short.  
Therefore, in the example, the cost for the first hour of the instruction (target time minus 
eight hours to target time minus seven hours) is three BM start-ups at £2000 = £6000. 
The total BM start-up volume gained (for the window) over the hour was 3000MWh. This 
gives a cost for that hour of £2/MWh. 
This needs to be repeated for the entire time in which the BM start-up was instructed (and 
not cancelled). 
This can be seen in the table below. 
 
BM Start-Up (BMSU) Lead Time 
8 
 7 
 6 
 5 
 4 
 3 
 2 
 1 
 0 
Instruct 
BMSU 1, 
2 & 3 
Cancel 
BMSU 1 
Cancel 
BMSU 2 
Target 
Time 
BMSU 1 
BMSU 2 
BMSU 3 
Requirement 
period for BMSU 
3 
500 MW 
1000 MW 
1500 MW 
MW 
Capacity 
time (h) 
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 58 of 59 
BM start-up example 
 
Lead time (hours) T-8 
to  
T-7 
T-7 
to  
T-6 
T-6 
to  
T-5 
T-5 
to  
T-4 
T-4 
to 
T-3 
T-3 
to  
T-2 
T-2 
to  
T-1 
T-1 to 
Target 
time 
Total cost for this 
lead time (£) 
6000 6000 4000 4000 2000 2000 2000 2000 
Total volume 
(MWh) 
3000 3000 2000 2000 1000 1000 1000 1000 
Cost/volume 
(£/MWh) 
2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 
 
Then to sum the total £/MWh cost incurred by the instruction of BM start-up we need to 
add the bottom row of the table. This gives: 
BPA BMSU = (2+2+2+2+2+2+2+2) = £16/MWh. (3) 
Therefore £16/MWh is added to the calculation of the BPA for those Settlement Periods 
within the requirement window. The BPA is then added to energy imbalance price when 
the system is short.  
Combining the Examples 
The total BPA sums the BPA calculated for STOR and that calculated for BM start-up. This 
gives: 
BPA = BPASTOR + BPABMSU 
If we assume that the requirement window of BPABMSU fell in Settlement Period 1 of the 
BPASTOR example then: 
BPA = £2.60/MWh + £16/MWh = £18.60/MWh (2) + (3) 
Furthermore, if we assume that this BPA was for the energy imbalance price calculated in 
the Section 3 example (where (1) is the volume weighted price of actions in the PAR 
stack) we get a SBP of: 
SBP = £29.60 + £18.60 = £48.20/MWh (1) + (2) + (3) 
  
25 June 2020 Version 15.0 
© ELEXON Limited 2020 Page 59 of 59 
Need more information? 
For more information please contact the BSC Service Desk at bscservicedesk@cgi.com 
or call 0370 010 6950. 
Also see: 
 BSC Section T: Settlement and Trading Charges 
 Guidance Note: Settlement Cashflows 
 
Intellectual Property Rights, Copyright and Disclaimer 
The copyright and other intellectual property rights in this document are vested in ELEXON or appear with the consent 
of the copyright owner. These materials are made available for you for the purposes of your participation in the electricity 
industry. If you have an interest in the electricity industry, you may view, download, copy, distribute, modify, transmit, 
publish, sell or create derivative works (in whatever format) from this document or  in other cases use for personal 
academic or other non -commercial purposes. All copyright and other proprietary notices contained in the document 
must be retained on any copy you make. 
All other rights of the copyright owner not expressly dealt with above are reserved. 
No representation, warranty or guarantee is made that the information in this document is accurate or complete. While 
care is taken in the collection and provision of this information, ELEXON Limited shall not be liable for any errors, 
omissions, misstatements or mistakes in any information or damages resulting from the use of this information or action 
taken in reliance on it. 
 